# Fonte: Integrated-care-models-overview.pdf
# Páginas: 42

=== PÁGINA 1 ===
Integrated care
models: an overview
Working document

=== PÁGINA 2 ===


=== PÁGINA 3 ===
Integrated care
models: an overview
Working document
October 2016
Health Services Delivery Programme
Division of Health Systems and Public Health

=== PÁGINA 4 ===
Abstract
Over the past decade many definitions, concepts and theories have emerged explaining and defining what integrated
care is and what the main building blocks for the successful integration of services are. By means of a scoping
literature review, this document aims to provide conceptual clarity and consolidate the current understanding of
integrated care models. In light of the current implementation of the European Framework for Action on Integrated
Health Services Delivery, this document provides a cross-cutting analysis of components that challenge or support
integrated care, and delivers an output of generic considerations when designing and implementing integrated care
models.
Keywords
DELIVERY OF HEALTHCARE, INTEGRATED
HEALTH CARE SYSTEMS
HEALTH SERVICES
Address requests about publications of the WHO Regional Office for Europe to:
Publications
WHO Regional Office for Europe
UN City, Marmorvej 51
DK-2100 Copenhagen Ø, Denmark
Alternatively, complete an online request form for documentation, health information, or for permission to quote or translate, on the
Regional Office website (http://www.euro.who.int/pubrequest).
© World Health Organization 2016
All rights reserved. The Regional Office for Europe of the World Health Organization welcomes requests for permission to reproduce or
translate its publications, in part or in full.
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion
whatsoever on the part of the World Health Organization concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its
authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Dotted lines on maps represent approximate border lines for
which there may not yet be full agreement.
The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not imply that they are endorsed or recommended by the
World Health Organization in preference to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the names
of proprietary products are distinguished by initial capital letters.
All reasonable precautions have been taken by the World Health Organization to verify the information contained in this publication.
However, the published material is being distributed without warranty of any kind, either express or implied. The responsibility for the
interpretation and use of the material lies with the reader. In no event shall the World Health Organization be liable for damages arising
from its use. The views expressed by authors, editors, or expert groups do not necessarily represent the decisions or the stated policy of
the World Health Organization.

=== PÁGINA 5 ===
Table of contents
List of figures ........................................................................................................................ iv
List of tables .......................................................................................................................... iv
List of abbreviations ............................................................................................................... v
Acknowledgements ............................................................................................................... vi
Preface ................................................................................................................................ vii
About this document ........................................................................................................... 1
Purpose and rationale ........................................................................................................ 1
Methods and sources of evidence ...................................................................................... 1
Overview of sections .......................................................................................................... 2
Sectione one: Integrated care as a multifaceted concept ................................................. 3
1.1 Definition of integrated care .......................................................................................... 3
1.2 Taxonomies of integration ............................................................................................ 5
Sectione two: Models of integrated care ............................................................................ 7
2.1 Individual models of integrated care ............................................................................. 7
2.2 Group- and disease-specific models ........................................................................... 10
2.3 Population-based models ........................................................................................... 15
Section three: Synthesis of evidence ............................................................................... 18
Final remarks...................................................................................................................... 21
References .......................................................................................................................... 21
Annexes ............................................................................................................................... 26

=== PÁGINA 6 ===
Integrated care models: an overview
Page iv
List of figures
Fig. 1. Perspectives shaping integrated care ......................................................................... 3
Fig. 2. Overview of PCMH attributes delivered at Bend Memorial Clinic, USA....................... 9
Fig. 3. The Chronic Care Model .......................................................................................... 10
Fig. 4. The Innovative Care for Chronic Conditions Model .................................................. 12
Fig. 5. The PRISMA model of Integrated Service Delivery System ...................................... 13
Fig. 6. Extended Kaiser Pyramid ......................................................................................... 15
List of tables
Table 1. Typologies of integration ......................................................................................... 5
Table 2. Key components and strategies of CCM ............................................................... 11
Table 3. Example measures within VA performance monitoring system.............................. 16

=== PÁGINA 7 ===
Integrated care models: an overview
Page v
List of abbreviations
AHRQ Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
AQuA Advanced Quality Alliance
CCM Chronic Care Model
CCU Continuity of Care Units
EFFA IHSD European Framework for Action on Integrated Health Services Delivery
GP general practitioner
IHO integrated healthcare organizations
IHSD integrated health services delivery
KP Kaiser Permanente
PAHO Pan-American Health Organisation
PCMH Patient-Centred Medical Home
VA Veterans Health Administration
USA United States of America

=== PÁGINA 8 ===
Integrated care models: an overview
Page vi
Acknowledgements
A first draft of this document was prepared by Nick Goodwin, International Foundation for
Integrated Care. Viktoria Stein, International Foundation for Integrated Care, contributed to
advance the document. The final document was developed by Altynai Satylganova and
reviewed by Juan Tello and Erica Barbazza, WHO Regional Office for Europe. The work
reflects the concepts underpinning activities of the Health Services Delivery Programme,
together with its office, the WHO European Centre for Primary Health Care in Almaty,
Kazakhstan. The Programme is a technical unit within the Division of Health Systems and
Public Health.
The work has benefitted from the expert input of Lourdes Ferrer, International Foundation for
Integrated Care, Nicki McNaney and Elizabeth Bradbury, Advancing Quality Alliance
(AQuA).
All figures are reproduced with the permission of authors.

=== PÁGINA 9 ===
Integrated care models: an overview
Page vii
Preface
In 2012, Member States of the WHO European Region endorsed the European health policy
Health 2020, recognizing health system strengthening as one of four priority action areas in
setting out a course of action for achieving the Region’s greatest health potential by year
2020 (1). The vision put forward by Health 2020 calls for people-centred health systems. In
doing so, it extends the same principles as first set out in the health-for-all and primary health
care agenda.
In line with these priorities, strategic entry points over the 2015–2020 period have been
further delineated in two priority areas: (i) transforming health services to meet the health
challenges of the 21st century and (ii) moving towards universal coverage for a Europe free
of catastrophic out-of-pocket payments (2).
Working to take the first of these priorities forward and in alignment the WHO global strategy
on people-centred and integrated health services (3), this document is intended to contribute
to the development of the European Framework for Action for Integrated Health Services
Delivery (4).

=== PÁGINA 10 ===


=== PÁGINA 11 ===
Integrated care models: an overview
Page 1
About this document
In many health systems, integrated care is seen as a possible solution to the growing
demand for improved patient experience and health outcomes of multimorbid and long-term
care patients. During the last decade different models and approaches to integrated care
have been widely applied and documented across a variety of settings, which has resulted in
the multiplicity of definitions and conceptual frameworks. A literature review conducted by
Armitage et al. (5) uncovered some 175 overlapping definitions and concepts of integrated
care, indicating the absence of consensus in its definition. Such multiplicity stems from the
polymorphous nature of the concept that has been applied from several disciplinary
perspectives such as public administration, social science, psychology as well as differing
professional points of view, such as clinical vs. managerial, holistic care vs. disease
management and public health vs. long-term care. Integrated care is, therefore, associated
with a wide range of different objectives (6).
Today, the lack of common definitions and underlying concepts aggravates the already
existing difficulty to assess integrated care (7). The need to better understand integrated
care extends beyond theoretical rhetoric and is based on the emerging pressure on health
systems to develop and invest in integrated care, which, in turn, calls for a pragmatic
understanding of the concept and mapping of evidence. This document aims to extract such
knowledge from the existing conceptual discourse on integrated care and evidence from the
field. By doing so, it will serve as a tool for understanding and distinguishing integrated care
models in practice.
Purpose and rationale
This document aims to consolidate the insights of conceptual frameworks, as well as provide
a synthesis of existing integrated care models.
The following key questions were posed to guide the review process:
1. How can ‘integrated care’ be defined?
2. What are the forms and taxonomies of integrated care?
3. What are the commonly known models of integrated care?
4. How can findings of this review inform an understanding and practical application of
European Framework for Action on Integrated Health Services Delivery (EFFA
IHSD)?
The ultimate objective of this document is to provide conceptual clarity and consolidate
practical know-how in designing and implementing integrated care models. Notably, earlier
versions of the document contributed to the development of EFFA IHSD (4).
Methods and sources of evidence
This report has adopted the methodology of a scoping literature review. Guided by the
specific expertise of its contributors, the report is a synthesis of selective reviews of

=== PÁGINA 12 ===
Integrated care models: an overview
Page 2
definitions, conceptual frameworks and practical models of integrated care. The range of
reviewed integrated care models is not exhaustive owing both to the limitations in the scope
and methodology of this review. However, through inclusion of a variety of types and levels
of integration, the range of components and settings described in reviewed integrated care
models has reached a certain saturation point, allowing for the subsequent analysis and
extrapolation of findings.
Notably, this document represents an ex-post approach: earlier versions served as the
background document for development of EFFA IHSD, while the current version has been
shaped by the evolution and adoption of the Framework itself.
Overview of sections
Responding to the key questions posed has in-turn informed the sections of the document.
Section 1 seeks to clarify the concept and taxonomies of integrated care. Section 2
examines well-known integrated care models. Finally, Section 3 provides a synthesis of the
reviewed evidence and summarizes the potential input to understanding and practical
application of EFFA IHSD.

=== PÁGINA 13 ===
Integrated care models: an overview
Page 3
Section one: Integrated care as a multifaceted concept
1.1 Definition of integrated care
Integrated care is often contraposed to fragmented and episodic care, and it is used
synonymously to terms like coordinated care and seamless care, among others. However,
there is no unifying definition or common conceptual understanding of integrated care, which
is most likely a result of ‘the polymorphous nature of integrated care itself’ (7). In effect, the
perspectives that construct the concept are likely to be shaped by views and expectations of
various stakeholders in the health system (Fig. 1).
Fig. 1. Perspectives shaping integrated care
Manager
Provider Care professional
Build and sustain shared culture
Coordinate services, tasks Advocate for service users;
and values; maintain oversight of
and patient care across provide and coordinate health
pooled resources and funding
professional, organizational
and social care
streams; coordinate joint targets;
and system boundaries
supervise diverse staff; manage
complex organizational
structures and relationships
Policy-maker
Design integration-friendly policies,
regulation and financing
Service user/carer
arrangements; develop appropriate Integrated care
Experience improved access
care systems, processes and
and navigation across elements
quality standards; support holistic
of care, including information-
evaluation of integrated systems
sharing
and programmes
Regulator Evaluator
Community
Register integrated providers; Measure integration against
Help to shape local services
assess care provision; monitor national and local measures;
joined-up care; eliminate poor contribute to evidence-
quality and safety informed integration
Source: Adapted from (8)
Based on the variety of perspectives and concepts, three principal definitions can be
distinguished from the literature.
1. A process-based definition used by many national governments in order to
understand the different components of integrated care.
“Integration is a coherent set of methods and models on the funding,
administrative, organizational, service delivery and clinical levels designed to
create connectivity, alignment and collaboration within and between the cure
and care sectors. The goal of these methods and models is to enhance quality
of care and quality of life, consumer satisfaction and system efficiency for
people by cutting across multiple services, providers and settings. Where the

=== PÁGINA 14 ===
Integrated care models: an overview
Page 4
result of such multi-pronged efforts to promote integration leads to benefits for
people, the outcome can be called integrated care” (adapted from (9)).
This definition imbues integrated care with the qualities of care coordination, as a continuous
support process over time, yet primarily bounded within the scope of health care. The
definition rightly describes the complexity and intersectoral nature of integrated care and it
has the advantage of distinguishing between integration, i.e. the process by which
professionals and organisations come together; and integrated care understood as the
outcome experienced by service users. However, the definition is rather a mechanistic one,
as integrated care is seen as a set of interconnecting processes rather than something that
has a specific meaning or value to the end user.
2. A user-led definition that supports a defining narrative and purpose for integrated
care strategies at all levels of the system.
“My care is planned with people who work together to understand me and my
carer(s), put me in control, coordinate and deliver services to achieve my best
outcomes” (10).
This definition of integrated care, now employed by the Government of England as part of a
central narrative to frame its integrated care strategies, is determined by people themselves.
This user-led definition followed a year-long national consultation process coordinated by
National Voices – a patient representative group. In this instance, the definition itself is
perhaps not as important as the process through which it was derived, as it highlights the
importance of population and individual needs in design, implementation and evaluation of
integrated care models. The definition has been accepted nationally as the narrative for
cross-governmental efforts.
3. A health system-based definition as used by WHO Regional Office for Europe.
“Integrated health services delivery is defined as an approach to strengthen
people-centred health systems through the promotion of the comprehensive
delivery of quality services across the life-course, designed according to the
multidimensional needs of the population and the individual and delivered by a
coordinated multidisciplinary team of providers working across settings and
levels of care. It should be effectively managed to ensure optimal outcomes
and the appropriate use of resources based on the best available evidence,
with feedback loops to continuously improve performance and to tackle
upstream causes of ill health and to promote well-being through intersectoral
and multisectoral actions” (4).
This definition adopts a health system perspective and uses the term ‘integrated health
services delivery (IHSD)’, acknowledging that integrated care is achieved through the
alignment of all health system functions and effective change management.1
Implicit to all three of these definitions is the notion that integrated care should be centred on
the needs of individuals, their families and communities (8). Indeed, there is considerable
evidence that the use of such a perspective ought to lie at the heart of any discussion about
integrated care in order to bring together potentially competing factions (11). This is not just
because a user-centred vision for care delivery overcomes the tendency to choose structural
1
In the context of this report, terms ‘integrated care’ and ‘integrated health services delivery’ are used interchangeably

=== PÁGINA 15 ===
Integrated care models: an overview
Page 5
or organisationally-based solutions, but also because it provides a compelling case as to the
objectives for integrated care and, therefore, how success might be assessed (12).
1.2 Taxonomies of integration
Evidence suggests that transformations towards integrated care require a good
understanding of the various dimensions of integration; which in effect calls for the
development of a comprehensive overview. Drawing from the definitions described above,
taxonomies of integrated care can be distinguished.
Table 1. Typologies of integration
Integration of organizations are brought together formally by mergers or through 'collectives' and/or
Organizational virtually through coordinated provider networks or via contacts between separate organizations
brokered by purchaser
Functional Integration of non-clinical support and back-office functions, such as electronic patient records
Integration of different clinical services at an organizational level, such as through teams of
Service
multidisciplinary professionals
Integration of care delivered by professional and providers to patients into a single or coherent
Clinical
process within and/or across professions, such as through use of shared guidelines and protocols
Source: adapted from (12)
Lewis et al. (12) distinguish four types of integration: organizational, functional, service and
clinical (Table 1). Organizational integration can be described as bringing together several
organizations through coordinated provider networks and mergers. Functional integration
means integration of non-clinical and back-office functions through, for example, shared
electronic patient records. Service integration refers to integration of different clinical
services at an organizational level by, for example, establishing multidisciplinary teams.
Clinical integration is integration of care into a single and coherent process within/or across
professions by means of, among others, using shared guidelines and protocols.
Each of these integration types can be further characterized by the mechanism of
integration. When integration is based on shared values for coordination and collaboration
that is seen as normative integration; integration characterized by the coherence of rules and
policies at various levels of the organisation is systemic integration (12).
Integration can also be described as horizontal or vertical (13). Horizontal integration
occurs when activities across operating units and/or organizations that are at the same stage
in the process of delivering services come together. Examples of horizontal integration can
include mergers of acute hospitals or mergers of social and health care organizations.
Vertical integration implies coordination of services among operating units that are at
different stages in the process of delivering services. Vertical integration brings together
organizations at different levels of the hierarchical structure under one management
umbrella by, for example, integrating primary and secondary care, or general practice and
community care.
Any of the above mentioned integration processes can occur as either real or virtual
integration (13). The former is characterized by mergers between organizations by for
example, sharing of physical assets and infrastructure, while the latter depicts rather the
formation of alliances, networks and contractual arrangements.

=== PÁGINA 16 ===
Integrated care models: an overview
Page 6
Depending on the scope of the integration process, Nolte and McKee (6) distinguish the
breadth of integration. It can range from care integration for particular individuals, care
integration for specific diseases or population groups, and care integration for entire
population. Similar to this, Curry and Ham (13) distinguish levels at which integration can be
pursued. Integration at the micro-level aims to achieve a seamless care experience for the
individual, made possible, for example, through personalized care plans. Integration at the
meso-level aims to provide integrated care for a particular care group or populations with the
same disease or conditions. Integration at the macro-level can be described as provision of
integrated care to an entire population through stratification of needs and tailoring services
according to these needs.
One can also distinguish the time-span that integration places focus; it can be oriented
towards a specific episode of care, e.g. hospitalization and follow-up for acute surgical
condition, or it can be provided adopting a life-course approach, e.g. for chronic conditions
(6).
Integrated care can take place at various levels and settings within the health sector, e.g.
between primary care and hospitals or as integration of health and social sectors, e.g. care
for long-term patients. In this regard, integration can be categorized according to its
intensity: full integration involves process of integrating health and social sectors into a new
organizational model, while partial integration creates non-binding linkages or ties that
support integration between two sectors in order to improve coordination between them (6).
The multidimensional nature of the integration processes points to the sophistication of
building integrated care models, as well as to the multiplicity of possibilities in their design.
Illustrating this complexity, the following section reviews selected integrated care models.

=== PÁGINA 17 ===
Integrated care models: an overview
Page 7
Section two: Models of integrated care
This section aims to provide an overview of widely known integrated care models in an
attempt to capture components and processes involved in their design and implementation.
To start, the section reviews models of integrated care according to the scale at which
integration happens – from models designed to integrate care for individuals with chronic
conditions and disease-specific models to population-based integrated models. The models
are sequenced in this way reasoning that wider population models will, as a rule, include
elements of more narrowly targeted models. For example, the population-based Kaiser
Permanente model described as an example here includes elements of disease
management for all chronic patients and case-management for high-risk patients.
2.1 Individual models of integrated care
This group of integrated care models is concerned with individual coordination of care for
high-risk patients and/or with multiple conditions and their carers. Individual models of
integrated care aim to facilitate the appropriate delivery of health care services and
overcome fragmentation between providers (14). Coordination of care for such patients
extends beyond one episode of care, where coordination between different providers is
necessary, but also embraces the concept of integration across the life-course. Individual
models described in the literature vary in design and integration processes that stand behind
them. The following sub-sections describe the widely known models.
2.1.1 Case-management
According to the American Case Management Association, case-management is “a
collaborative process that encompasses communication and facilitates care along a
continuum through effective resource coordination… goals of case management include the
achievement of optimal health, access to care and appropriate utilization of resources,
balanced with the patient's right to self-determination” (15). Despite the myriad of
modifications that have been applied within and outside of the United States of America
(USA) system, the generic principle of case-management remains the same: to ensure
coordination of a patient’s care through the assignment of a case manager. The role of a
case manager can be designated to certified case managers with or without a medical
background as well as to advanced primary care nurses or allied health professionals
(15,16). Crucial components of case-management include: (i) defining and selecting target
individuals for which case management is most appropriate, e.g. patients with
multimorbidities, patients frequently admitted to hospitals or patients needing coordination
within and across health and social care; (ii) assessment and individual care planning; (iii)
regular monitoring of patients; and (iv) adjustment of care plans if necessary. The primary
tasks of a case manager are therefore to assess the patient’s and carer’s needs, develop
tailored care plan, organize and adjust care processes accordingly, monitor quality of care
and maintain contact with the patient and carer (17).
Evidence shows that case-management decreases the number of hospital (re)admissions
and improves patient satisfaction, while evidence on cost-effectiveness case-management
remains controversial (13). In this regard an important consideration in designing and
delivering case-management is that it should be delivered to carefully selected groups of
patients that are most likely to benefit from it.

=== PÁGINA 18 ===
Integrated care models: an overview
Page 8
2.1.2 Individual care plans
Care planning is another approach of integrating care for patients with multimorbidity and
long-term conditions. The aim is to deliver more personalized and targeted care creating
shared care plans that map care processes, clearly articulate the role of each provider and
patients in the care process, and hold retrospective and prospective information about the
care for a particular patient. Care plans are a point of reference for any provider involved in
an individual’s care (13). Care coordinators assess the needs of a patient, develop care
plans and negotiate and coordinate the delivery of multidisciplinary care (18). The success of
care plans that extend to the interface of health and social sectors rely on the influential
power that care coordinators are given (19).
Considerations should be made in the design of care plans to ensure that it brings intended
outcomes. Similarly to case-management, care plans are costly and labour intensive.
Therefore, they require clear eligibility criteria and careful selection of beneficiaries. In
developing care plans it is important that the patient and/or the carer has ownership of and
understands the plan (13). Moreover, care plans should be dynamic in nature, adjusted
through periodic assessments and patient feedback. The use of information technology is
crucial to facilitate the development of shared care plans that can be accessed by providers
across settings, patients and carers.
2.1.3 Patient-centred medical home
Patient-centred medical home(s)2 (PCMH) have been developed and promoted in the USA
as a model for transforming the organization and delivery of primary care. Interest in PCMH
emerged due to people’s lack of access to primary care, challenges in navigating
fragmented care systems and rising costs of care. It was promoted by some of the largest
primary care physician societies in the country and its principles were endorsed and
extensively tested by a range of purchasers, professionals and consumer organisations.
In broad terms, PCMH is a physician-directed group practice that can provide care which is
accessible, continuous, comprehensive and coordinated and delivered in the context of
family and community. The PCMH model adopts a holistic approach to managing patients
with chronic diseases, co- and multimorbidities by offering an alternative individual model of
primary care where patients are assigned to particular medical homes and physicians (13).
Therefore, PCMH should not be regarded as a setting where care is delivered but rather as
a comprehensive model of organization that delivers the core functions of primary care (20).
The key attributes of PCMH are comprehensiveness, patient-centredness, coordination,
accessibility, quality and safety.
The PCMH model argues that all types of care, e.g. sub-speciality care, hospitals, home
health agencies, nursing homes, and stakeholders, e.g. community, family, public and
private community-based services, should be brought together by means of either real or
virtual integration. A distinctive feature of the PCMH model is that it offers more personalized
care by assigning patients to primary care physicians, ensuring patients know who is
responsible for their health and providers know the patients they are responsible for. PCMH
is seen as the gate-opener to care – as opposed to managing or limiting access – through
actively coordinating people to the most appropriate care. This means that much of the care
is delivered by multidisciplinary teams in primary care, but in case specialist care is needed,
primary care teams buy these services on behalf of the patient (13). PCMH employs the
principles of shared responsibility for a patient’s health, which is also enabled by a coherent
2 Sometimes also referred as primary care medical home

=== PÁGINA 19 ===
Integrated care models: an overview
Page 9
provider payment mechanism. Patient registries are recognized to play a special role in the
success of PCMH models along with information technology and health information
exchanges so that patients get indicated services when and where they need it in a culturally
and linguistically appropriate manner (Fig. 2).
Fig. 2. Overview of PCMH attributes delivered at Bend Memorial Clinic, USA
Source: Adapted from (21)
Evaluation of the PCMH model shows that it brings a 20 percent reduction in hospital
admissions and 12 percent reduction in readmission rates among its beneficiaries (22).
Criticism of the model suggests that in highly fragmented systems, integration among
providers might not happen unless reimbursement mechanisms specifically incentivize
integration (23).
2.1.4 Personal health budgets
Based on the assumption that the coordination of care can be best performed by patients
themselves, personal health budgets3 are a model of integrated care that give patients
greater autonomy over their care. Over the past two decades, personal health budget
models have been piloted in the USA and United Kingdom in the area of home- and
community-based long-term services (24) and now are implemented in Austria, Germany,
Netherlands and Norway (13).
3 Personal health budgets are sometimes also called self-directed care.

=== PÁGINA 20 ===
Integrated care models: an overview
Page 10
The model suggests that acting as budget holders, patients can better coordinate their care
according to their needs by purchasing services across providers (25). Cash payments or
virtual budgets can be used not only for purchasing services, but also for supporting family
members as carers (13). Evaluations of personal health budgets show higher levels of
patient satisfaction and lowered rates of unmet needs in comparison to conventional care
models, especially among younger patients with disabilities (26). Assessments have also
shown higher efficiency in delivered care, mainly due to better continuity and avoidance of
duplications. However, studies show that much of the administrative burden and risk falls on
patients and their carer, and therefore requires patient capacity to manage it. Quality and the
volume of services purchased heavily relies on patients’ or carers’ ability to adequately
assess it, which is difficult given the information asymmetry in health (27).
2.2 Group- and disease-specific models
2.2.1 Chronic care model
The chronic care model (CCM) is one of the most well-known and widely applied integrated
care models. CCM was developed in 1998 by a group of researchers from the MacColl
Institute for Healthcare Innovation in USA (28). The model was developed in recognition of
health system failures to meet the needs of people with chronic illnesses and provide a
comprehensive framework for the organization of health services in order to improve
outcomes for people with chronic conditions. CCM suggests to shift from acute, episodic and
reactive care towards care that embraces longitudinal, preventative, community-based and
integrated approaches. Developed as an outcome of extensive systematic literature review,
the design of CCM brings together evidence-based factors and components that are widely
documented to have a positive impact on patient outcomes, quality of care and cost savings.
CCM consists of six main domains: community, health system, self-management support,
delivery system design, decision support and clinical information systems (Fig. 3).
Fig. 3. The Chronic Care Model
Source: (29)
Each of the domains can be further unpacked into strategies that are essential for achieving
integrated chronic care. For example, within the community domain, a key strategy consists
of mobilizing community resources to meet the needs of patients by establishing effective

=== PÁGINA 21 ===
Integrated care models: an overview
Page 11
partnerships with community organizations and encouraging patients to participate in
community programmes. Activities within the community domain should also include
advocacy to adequately represent patient interests in setting the health agenda. An overview
of strategies within each domain is shown in Table 2. Based on pilot testing and published
evidence, the model was revised in 2003 and components such as cultural competency,
patient safety, care coordination, community policies, and case management were added to
the initial scheme.
Table 2. Key components and strategies of CCM
Domain Objective/description Strategies
Community Mobilize community (cid:131) Encourage patients to participate in effective community programs
resources to meet needs of (cid:131) Form partnerships with community organizations to support and
patients develop interventions that fill gaps in needed services
(cid:131) Advocate for policies to improve patient care*
Health system Create a culture, organization (cid:131) Visibly support improvement at all levels of the organization,
and mechanisms that beginning with the senior leader
promote safe, high quality (cid:131) Promote effective improvement strategies aimed at
care comprehensive system change
(cid:131) Encourage open and systematic handling of errors and quality
problems to improve care*
(cid:131) Provide incentives based on quality of care
(cid:131) Develop agreements that facilitate care coordination within and
across organizations
Delivery system Assure the delivery of (cid:131) Define roles and distribute tasks among team members
design effective, efficient clinical (cid:131) Use planned interactions to support evidence-based care
care and self-management (cid:131) Provide clinical case management services for complex patients*
support (cid:131) Ensure regular follow-up by the care team
(cid:131) Give care that patients understand and that fits with their cultural
background*
Self-management Empower and prepare (cid:131) Emphasize the patient's central role in managing their health
support patients to manage their (cid:131) Use effective self-management support strategies that include
health and health care assessment, goal-setting, action planning, problem-solving and
follow-up
(cid:131) Organize internal and community resources to provide ongoing
self-management support to patient
Decision support Promote clinical care that is (cid:131) Embed evidence-based guidelines into daily clinical practice
consistent with scientific (cid:131) Share evidence-based guidelines and information with patients to
evidence and patient encourage their participation
preferences (cid:131) Use proven provider education methods
(cid:131) Integrate specialist expertise and primary care
Clinical information Organize patient and (cid:131) Provide timely reminders for providers and patients
systems population data to facilitate (cid:131) Identify relevant subpopulations for proactive care
efficient and effective care (cid:131) Facilitate individual patient care planning
(cid:131) Share information with patients and providers to coordinate care*
(cid:131) Monitor performance of practice team and care system
* strategies that were added to the original CCM after 2003 revision
Source: adapted from (28)
Evidence-based strategies under each domain, in combination, foster productive interactions
between informed patients who take an active part in their care and providers with resources
and expertise (28). The key to the success of the CCM, as demonstrated in a number of

=== PÁGINA 22 ===
Integrated care models: an overview
Page 12
projects, has been the productive, bidirectional communication within multidisciplinary team
as well as the provision of continuous support to patients for self-care (30). Reviews
conducted in regards to the cost-effectiveness of the CCM have reported that while
application of CCM and its components lead to better patient outcomes and satisfaction, the
return of upfront investments requires time (30).
Other CCM modifications include WHO’s Innovative Care for Chronic Conditions framework
(31) and the Expanded Chronic Care Model (32). This new generation of chronic care
models take into account broad determinants of health and focus on a system of coordinated
interventions across different types, levels and settings of care, extending actions beyond
the clinical intervention towards health promotion, prevention, screening and early detection,
management of diagnosed cases, rehabilitation and palliative care (Fig. 4).
Fig. 4. The Innovative Care for Chronic Conditions Model
Source: (31)
2.2.2 Integrated care models for elderly and frail
Integrated care models organized for the elderly and frail represent another specific group of
initiatives. This group of integrated care models is distinguished due to the high specificity of
service individual needs that guide the design of care models and the extent to which care
requires integration between health and social services.
PRISMA is a Canadian model designed to integrate service delivery for community-dwelling
people with moderate-to-severe impairment, who need coordination between two or more
services (33). The aim of the model is to preserve the functional autonomy of individuals.
The model is designed to serve as a single entry-point to the system and to coordinate care
across a network of different providers (Fig. 5). Case-management and the use of
computerized charts are essential components for coordination (13).
According to the model, integration is achieved through an established joint governing board
of health and social care. The board defines the strategy, allocates resources to the network
and manages provider groups. An assessment of the impact has shown that the PRISMA

=== PÁGINA 23 ===
Integrated care models: an overview
Page 13
model sustained the functional stability of individuals, decreased the extent of unmet needs
and reduced the burden placed on carers. Individuals enrolled to the PRISMA programme
also decreased their risk of hospital readmissions (34).
Fig. 5. The PRISMA model of Integrated Service Delivery System
CLSC - Centre local de services communautaires (Local community services centre)
Source: (35)
To overcome fragmentation of care for older people the borough of Torbay in England has
established five integrated health and social care teams. The teams are organized according
to territorial principles and are aligned with general practices in the same localities. The
model targeted elderly patients with multimorbidities, who require intensive support from
community matrons (13). The model employs health and social care coordinators, who act
as the single point of contact within each team. Similar to PRISMA, Torbay Care Trust was
established as a joint health and social care board with pooled budgets. Budgets are
allocated according to the needs of population and are not restricted to certain types of care.
Proactive discharge planning and transitional care have allowed Torbay’s model to achieve
performance improvements, such as reductions in average length of hospital stay and
hospital readmissions (36).
Integrated care models targeting small groups of community-dwelling older people were
implemented by two Italian municipalities of Rovereto and Vittorio Veneto. In order to
integrate health and social services in a continuum of care, case managers where
introduced (37). Similar to abovementioned models targeted at elderly and frail, these
models focused on case management and multidisciplinary teams with a single entry point.
During the first entry to the system a geriatric assessment was performed with the
subsequent provision of community-based medical and social services (37).

=== PÁGINA 24 ===
Integrated care models: an overview
Page 14
2.2.3 Disease-specific integrated care models
Some countries have developed models aimed to provide better integration of care for
people with certain diseases and long-term conditions such as diabetes mellitus,
cardiovascular diseases, COPD and bronchial asthma. The following are examples of
several such models.
Chains of care is an integrated care model developed in Sweden with the aim of linking
primary, hospital and community care through integrated pathways based on local
agreements with between providers (38). Typical chains of care include screening element in
a primary care centre, treatment plans developed in specialist centre and rehabilitation
provided in community (39). Contractual agreements and alignment of incentives that enable
efficient use of resources are distinctive features of the Swedish model.
Managed clinical networks were developed in Scotland under the vision of “linked groups of
health professional and organizations from primary, secondary and tertiary care, working in a
coordinated manner, unconstrained by existing professional and health board boundaries to
ensure equitable provision of high quality clinically effective services” (40). The model is a
virtual integration that puts patients at the centre to enhance access to services and
decrease variations in the quality of care. Active management of patients has been achieved
by ensuring the more efficient use of the health workforce.
Starting in 1993, health reforms have introduced structural frameworks to enable the
development of integrated care in Germany (41,42). The first comprehensive effort to
implement a programme of integrated care to address fragmentation and lack of
coordination across levels in the German health system was the introduction of disease
management programmes (DMPs) in 2002. DMPs are standardized nationwide programmes
for individuals with chronic conditions introduced based on a regulatory top-down framework
(42,43). The Federal Insurance Office defines them as “the coordinated treatment and care
of patients during the entire duration of a [chronic] disease across boundaries between
providers and on the basis of scientific and up-to-date evidence” (42). DMPs were devised to
foster principles of best evidence-based treatment, promotion of service delivery across
levels of care, patient self-management and the introduction of new quality assurance
mechanisms (44). Importantly, they have been implemented in the context of existing health
service delivery structures in Germany (42).
While enrolment in DMPs for patients and providers occurs on a voluntary basis, enrolled
patients are expected to play an active role in formulating and adhering to treatment goals
based on shared decision-making. Patients are also obliged to participate in disease-specific
education and self-management programmes. Participating providers must comply with
defined training and infrastructure requirements (44). General practitioners (GPs) usually
serve as care coordinator ensuring that treatment and patient pathways are consistent with
evidence-based DMP guidelines. Participation in DMP requires that providers actively
participate in quality circles and regularly attend continuous medical education trainings.
DMPs have enhanced the role of GPs in chronic care and contributed to a clear definition of
provider roles across the continuum of care (44). DMPs also encompass IT-supported
documentation and patient information, shared-decision making and patient education (45).

=== PÁGINA 25 ===
Integrated care models: an overview
Page 15
2.3 Population-based models
2.3.1 Kaiser Permanente
Kaiser Permanente (KP) is one of the largest health maintenance organizations in USA,
accounting for more than 9.6 million members in eight regions of the country (46). KP is a
virtually integrated system consisting of three interrelated entities: a non-profit health plan
that bears insurance risks (Kaiser Foundation Health Plan), self-governed for-profit medical
groups of physicians (Permanente Medical Groups), and a non-profit hospital system (Kaiser
Foundation Hospitals). Permanente Medical Groups and Kaiser Foundation Hospitals share
a global budget. All three components hold mutual exclusivity towards purchasing and
providing services and are unified by a common mission, representing a mixture of systemic
and normative integration.
KP model of integrated care is based on stratification of the population and supply of
different type of services according to needs. In the KP model, the population receives
promotion and prevention services with the aim to control exposure to risk factors; the
majority of chronic care patients receive support for self-management of their illness and
high-risk patients receive disease and case management, which combines self-management
and professional care. The stratification model is presented in the well-known Kaiser
Pyramid (Fig. 6). One of the prominent adaptations of this stratification model is the King’s
Fund pyramid, which extends beyond health care and stratifies populations according to
their health and social needs (47).
Fig. 6. Extended Kaiser Pyramid
Source: Adapted from (47)
Integration within the KP model is focused on chronic care and multispecialty practice4,
rather than primary and secondary care. The core components to the KP model put
emphasis on prevention, self-management support, disease management and case
management for members with multiple conditions (13). A crucial component that has
defined the success of the KP integrated care model is that all entities within the KP group
are mutually accountable for a patient’s outcomes and positive patient experience and
provider incentives are linked to quality of care and patient satisfaction. In this regard, an
4 Multispecialty clinical practice are groups where generalists work alongside specialists to deliver integrated care

=== PÁGINA 26 ===
Integrated care models: an overview
Page 16
episode of acute hospital admission or readmission is seen as failure of the entire system.
Active management of patients in hospitals is ensured through clearly defined and evidence-
based clinical pathways and protocols. In doing so, the KP model was innovative in creating
new professional groups such as hospitalists5, discharge managers, various nurse profiles
and care coordinators, allowing the efficient use of human resources and seamless
transitions of care between settings.
Another crucial element of the KP model is overcoming information asymmetry and
fragmentation between providers through the introduction of its own extensive information
system - HealthConnect Programme. It allows providers within the KP group to access both
inpatient and ambulatory patient records, as well as facilitates patient self-management
allowing patients to access their records, make appointments and order prescription refills.
Adopting the clinical governance strategies and continuous focus on performance
improvement allows KP model to be sustained and evolve over time.
2.3.2 Veterans Health Administration
The Veterans Health Administration (VA) is a health system that provides integrated services
to older people with chronic conditions in the USA. The VA employs physicians, owns and
runs hospitals, medical offices and manages services within its network. Transformed from a
hospital-based system, the VA currently consists of 21 regionally based integrated service
networks. The structural changes were guided by the assumption that gains in effectiveness
and efficiency can be achieved through better coordination between facilities, the synergy of
resources and provision of care in the most appropriate settings (48). Resources received
from the federal government are not allocated to facilities but rather to networks – a
mechanism through which service integration and shared accountability are achieved.
Table 3. Example measures within VA performance monitoring system
Value domain Representative measures
(cid:131) Prevention index (immunization, cancer and substance use screening)
(cid:131) Chronic disease index (heart, lung, endocrine diseases, including heart failure, COPD,
Quality (effective, safe)
diabetes)
(cid:131) Palliative care index (pain screening and management)
(cid:131) Wait times for new primary care appointments
Access (timely) (cid:131) Wait times for new specialty care appointments
(cid:131) Percentage of patients seen within 20 minutes of scheduled appointment
Satisfaction (patient-centred) (cid:131) Perception of quality as very good or excellent
(cid:131) Perception on Picker-based satisfaction survey
Function (patient-centered) (cid:131) Percentage of spinal cord injury patients discharged to independent living
(cid:131) Percentage of homeless patients discharged to independent living
Community health (cid:131) Accreditation of research programs
(equitable) (cid:131) Learner perception survey
(cid:131) Days in accounts receivable and other fiscal measures
Cost-effectiveness (efficient)
(cid:131) Value equation
Source: adapted from (48)
A transformative vision and change management have been a cornerstone in achieving
integration within the VA network. A distinctive feature of the VA system is the well-praised
culture of measurement and reporting which supported the mechanisms of accountability
and continuous performance improvement. Measures are determined by groups of indicators
5 Physicians whose primary professional focus is the general medical care of hospitalized patients

=== PÁGINA 27 ===
Integrated care models: an overview
Page 17
distributed according to several value domains, which are closely monitored in each of the
networks (Table 3).
The VA model has put a great deal of effort in organizing care processes around patients’
needs and enabling patient self-management through investments into supportive
information technology. Much of the transformations were achieved by virtue of fostering
clinical governance and the VA’s own health service research.
2.3.3 Integrated care in Basque country
Integrated care in the Basque country has emerged with the launch of Strategy to tackle the
challenge of chronicity in the Basque Country, in 2010 (47). The strategy introduced
integrated care approaches to transform health services delivery to improve care for chronic
patients. Basque integrated care strategy was developed with acknowledgment of the
interdependencies between primary care, social services and hospitals to achieve better
outcomes among patients with chronic conditions.
Two approaches for integrated care were used in Basque country. A bottom-up
implementation approach focused on clinical and functional integration that promoted
coordination of care processes between primary and secondary care. An organizational
integration was applied by merging hospital and primary care structures under one single
organization – Integrated Healthcare Organizations (IHOs) (49). Currently, the Basque
country accounts for 13 IHOs with catchment areas from 30 000 to 400 000 persons.
Simultaneous activation of all levels of the system and the development of new professions
that facilitate the delivery of integrated care are important features of this model. IHOs in
Bidasoa have established Units for Continuity of Care (CCU) to treat high-risk patients with
co- and multimorbidities. The CCUs use individual continuity of care plans to improve
coordination across providers. CCUs are staffed with designated referral internists
responsible for admission and stabilization of chronic patients and with liaison nurses who
support patients’ discharge and transition from hospital to home where they will then be
followed-up by their GP. Referral internists work in close collaboration with GPs in care
planning outside the acute episodes.
The development of tools and strategies that enable patient education to manage their own
disease has been another success factor of the Basque integrated care strategy. Shared
medical records and a new health information system developed together with users have
facilitated coordination between providers. Performance measurement included tracking of
specific indicators such as hospital admissions and readmissions for ambulatory care
sensitive conditions have enabled a means to showcase the positive implications on patient
outcomes and economic savings. This, in turn, was an essential component in overcoming
stakeholder resistance and ensuring sustainability of the initiative.

=== PÁGINA 28 ===
Integrated care models: an overview
Page 18
Section three: Synthesis of evidence
This section provides a synthesis of the reviewed integrated care model components and
combines it with findings of the similar analyses (7,13,50,51). Notably, it aims to support the
pragmatic understanding of the EFFA IHSD and assist in its practical application along other
tools in the Frameworks’ implementation package (52).
Literature review presented in this document has demonstrated that integrated care models
have developed as an imperative to respond to the increasing chronicity and co-morbidity in
population. Most of the described integrated care models have emerged as articulated
interventions intended to improve care for patients with chronic conditions, multimorbidities,
and patients from specific groups such as the elderly and frail, making them perhaps the
most natural entry point for introducing and piloting integrated care models.
The need for the integration of care across providers, settings and sectors directly correlates
with the growing burden of chronic diseases and increasing demand for coordination across
providers in health and social sector. Leutz (53) argues that the more severe demands are in
terms of needs corresponds to an increase in the introduction of integrated care models. The
identification of population needs, therefore, should be a starting point in developing any
integrated care strategy. For example, the needs of elderly and frail populations in integrated
care models like PRISMA and Torbay were beyond the scope of health sector resulting in
integration with the social sector. Aligned with the vision set out in the EFFA IHSD,
integrated care should only be judged successful if it contributes to better care experiences
and improved care outcomes (54).
One of the most pressing concerns in adopting integrated care models in practice is an
understanding of the extent to which systems should seek to develop new organisational
solutions. A typical challenge faced by the reviewed integrated care models suggests that
organizational and functional integration did neither guarantee clinical integration at provider
level, nor was sufficient to achieve it. For example, a study by McAdam (55) of integrated
health care organisations in the USA and Canada found that at least half of them were not
providing better coordinated care to clients, but were integrated only through acquiring new
service lines or merging their operations.
In order to succeed, integrated care models should rely on a set of components and delivery
strategies (56,57). The components associated with successful integrated care models
include enabling patient engagement and self-management support, developing multi-
professional working culture, adopting evidence-based clinical pathways and protocols,
aligning incentives, effectively managing resource, continuously monitoring and improving
performance, and investing in supporting information technologies. In general,
multicomponent approaches can be characterized as the optimization and innovation of
service delivery processes (4).
Nonetheless, in order to sustain transformations over time, integrated care models require
actions that span from organizational, functional, professional and service delivery levels up
to transformations on system level. For example, the adoption of multidisciplinary
approaches goes beyond the organization of providers and requires alignment of health
workforce policies at the system-level. Similarly, adjustment of incentives at the
organizational level requires adjustment of wider health system financing mechanisms.
These findings are echoed by the findings of the study conducted by the Health Service
Management Centre at the University of Birmingham, which concluded a set of common
essential features that serve as prerequisite to the success of integrated care models (58):

=== PÁGINA 29 ===
Integrated care models: an overview
Page 19
(cid:131) common cause, i.e. understanding the need to change from a population health
perspective, often driven by a ‘burning platform’ of rising demand but limited
resources
(cid:131) common vision and strategy, which is a process inclusive of all agencies, including
local people, to develop clear aspirations, measurable goals and time-scales for
change
(cid:131) joint funding and planning with a clear focus on shared outcomes and deliverables,
resource/reward agreements linked to group performance
(cid:131) joint delivery with strong leadership, high trust, clear governance arrangements,
effective and dedicated managerial resources, phased in over time
(cid:131) evaluation so that outcomes can be assessed to see if goals are being met (often
overlooked)
(cid:131) quality improvement process through developing a learning organization by using
data and information to support reviews of performance and instigate changes and
decisions
Analogous findings are presented in the concept of the Integrated Health Service Delivery
Networks developed by Pan American Health Organization (59) (Annex 1), findings of the
EU-funded INTEGRATE project (50) (Annex 2) and the review conducted by the King’s Fund
(51) (Annex 3). Each highlights the crucial importance of a health system’s approach in the
design and delivery of integrated care models.
In view of the analysed evidence, it becomes clear that establishing integrated care is a
multifaceted and long-term process. The review found difficulties in showcasing the causality
between the delivery of integrated care and outcomes. There are many reasons for this.
Firstly, in the context of integrated care it is not possible to effectively separate
multicomponent strategies that are needed to achieve results. Secondly, the criteria for
assessing the success of integrated care models are not necessarily specific or measurable.
Lastly, there are few opportunities for making comparisons with alternative models or control
cases. Importantly, the transformation of health services delivery towards integrated care
requires an understanding of the process of change itself. For example, the PCMH model
(60) shows that implementation of integrated care models has been beset by a range of key
implementation challenges such as:
(cid:131) predominant professional cultures and behaviours, including physician reluctance to
participate;
(cid:131) continuation of fee-for-service payment mechanisms, when otherwise thinking about
a population-health perspective;
(cid:131) lack of scale in the size and scope of practices taking forward the idea;
(cid:131) overreliance on electronic medical records as key to transformational change;
(cid:131) lack of focus or prioritisation on the target population that would most benefit from
interventions and too many peripheral responsibilities;
(cid:131) lack of physician leadership and adequate managerial support;
(cid:131) unrealistic expectations;
(cid:131) resistance to change among care users and fear to lose existing entitlements.
Literature offers evidence that integrated care models should be introduced and
implemented by means of a change management strategy. There is remarkable coherence

=== PÁGINA 30 ===
Integrated care models: an overview
Page 20
in the evidence for some key components of such a strategy (11,51,61). For example,
integrated care does not apply to business redesign processes that have been used
elsewhere in health reform, so change management strategies need to recognise the key
issue of its’ multifaceted nature. This is further underlined by the many different generic
technical components described above that are observed as core components of integrated
care. However, there does appear to be some guidance on the first steps required to make
change happen; specifically, development of a common vision should be based on a clear
articulation of the population’s needs in local communities, which then can develop into a
shared strategy for change (13,62,63). It is clear that even these first steps for integrated
care require careful planning and that the process of change needs strong leadership and
good management support.

=== PÁGINA 31 ===
Integrated care models: an overview
Page 21
Final remarks
In the absence of a unifying definition and an overarching approach, this document has
attempted to consolidate and align evidence on integrated care. It provides an analysis of
definitions and components that challenge or support integrated care. In doing so, it delivers
a synthesis of generic considerations when designing and implementing integrated care
models.
Recalling the key questions posed, this report finds the following:
1. How can ‘integrated care’ be defined? The concept of integrated care is strongly
shaped by perspectives and expectations of various users in the health system,
making a unified definition difficult. Interestingly, all definitions converge around
highlighting the central role of population and individual needs. Furthermore,
adopting a health system perspective, the use of the term ‘integrated health service
delivery’ is seen as more reflective of the notion.
2. What are the forms and taxonomies of integrated care? Integrated care can be
distinguished according to the processes of integration. However, dimensions are
multiple including type, mechanism, level and intensity of integration. The
multidimensional nature of integration points to the complexity in building integrated
care models, as well as to the multiplicity of possibilities in their design.
3. What are the commonly known models of integrated care? Reviewed literature
shows a wealth of implemented and evaluated integrated care models that range
from individual and disease-specific models to models that embrace entire
populations. Individual integrated care models include case management, individual
care planning, patient-centred medical home and personal health budgets. Group
and disease specific models include CCM, disease management programmes and
integrated care models for elderly and frail. Population-based models include those
implemented by KP, VA and Basque country.
4. How can findings of this review inform an understanding and practical
application of EFFA IHSD? Horizontal analysis of evidence on integrated care
models allows for consolidating a pool of generic considerations in designing and
implementing integrated care strategies such as the importance of designing care
around population needs, aligning wider health system functions and developing a
change management strategy.
In conclusion, while it has been possible to identify general principles and core components,
it cannot be concluded that one model best supports integrated care (51). Any integrated
model development is strongly contextually-bound, nearly impossible to replicate and can
only be successful if it does account for unique needs and characteristics of the population it
aims to serve.

=== PÁGINA 32 ===
Integrated care models: an overview
Page 22
References6
1. WHO Regional Office for Europe. Health 2020: a European policy framework
supporting action across government and society for health and well-being.
Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office for Europe; 2013
(http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/199536/Health2020-
Short.pdf?ua=1).
2. WHO Regional Office for Europe. European strategic directions towards Health 2020
goals. Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office for Europe; 2015.
3. WHO. WHO global strategy on people-centred and integrated health services. 2016
(http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/155002/1/WHO_HIS_SDS_2015.6_eng.pdf?ua
=1).
4. WHO Regional Office for Europe. Strengthening people-centred health systems in the
WHO European Region: framework for action on integrated health services delivery.
2016
(http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0004/315787/66wd15e_FFA_IHSD_16
0535.pdf?ua=1).
5. Armitage GD, Suter E, Oelke ND, Adair CE. Health systems integration: state of the
evidence. Int J Integr Care. 2009;9(2) (http://www.ijic.org/article/10.5334/ijic.316/).
6. Nolte E, McKee M. Caring for people with chronic conditions: a health system
perspective. Copenhagen: WHO on behalf of the European Observatory on Health
Systems and Policies; 2008.
7. RAND Europe. National Evaluation of the Department of Health’s Integrated Care
Pilots. Cambridge: RAND Europe; 2012.
8. Shaw S, Rosen R, Rumbold B. What is integrated care? An overview of integrated care
in NHS. Nuffield Trust;
2011(http://www.nuffieldtrust.org.uk/sites/files/nuffield/publication/what_is_integrated_c
are_research_report_june11_0.pdf).
9. Kodner DL, Spreeuwenberg C. Integrated care: meaning, logic, applications, and
implications – a discussion paper. Int J Integr Care. 2002 Nov 14;2(4)
(http://www.ijic.org/article/10.5334/ijic.67/).
10. National Voices. A narrative for person-centred coordinated care. 2013
(http://www.england.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2013/05/nv-narrative-cc.pdf).
11. Ham C, Walsh N. Making integrated care happen at scale and pace. The King’s Fund;
2013 (http://www.kingsfund.org.uk/sites/files/kf/field/field_publication_file/making-
integrated-care-happen-kingsfund-mar13.pdf).
12. Lewis R, Rosen R, Goodwin N, Dixon J. Where next for integrated care organizations
in the English NHS? London: The King’s Fund; 2010.
13. Curry N, Ham C. Clinical and service integration. The route to improved outcomes. The
King’s Fund; 2010 (https://www.kingsfund.org.uk/sites/files/kf/Clinical-and-service-
integration-Natasha-Curry-Chris-Ham-22-November-2010.pdf).
14. Bodenheimer T. Coordinating care--a perilous journey through the health care system.
N Engl J Med. 2008 Mar 6;358(10):1064–71.
15. American Case Management Association. Definition of case management [website].
(http://www.acmaweb.org/section.aspx?sID=4)
16. Boaden R, Dusheiko M, Gravelle H, Parker S, Pickard S, Roland M, et al. Evercare:
Evaluation of the Evercare approach to case management: final report. University of
Manchester: National Primary Care Research and Development Centre; 2006
(http://www.population-health.manchester.ac.uk/primarycare/npcrdc-
archive/Publications/NOV06%20EVERCARE%20FINAL%20REPORT.pdf).
6 Accessed 17 October 2016

=== PÁGINA 33 ===
Integrated care models: an overview
Page 23
17. Singh D, Ham C. Improving Care for People with Long term Conditions: A Review of
UK and International Frameworks. Health Services Management Centre: Birmingham
and NHS Institute for Innovation and Improvement; 2006
(http://www.improvingchroniccare.org/downloads/review_of_international_frameworks_
_chris_hamm.pdf).
18. Goodwin N, Lawton-Smith S. Integrating care for people with mental illness: the Care
Programme Approach in England and its implications for long-term conditions
management. Int J Integr Care. 2010;10(1) (http://www.ijic.org/article/10.5334/ijic.516/)
19. Goodwin N, Perri 6, Peck E, Freeman T, Posaner R. Managing Across Diverse
Networks of Care: Lessons from Other Sectors. 2004
(http://www.netscc.ac.uk/hsdr/files/adhoc/39-policy-report.pdf)
20. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Defining the PCMH | PCMH Resource
Center [website] (https://pcmh.ahrq.gov/page/defining-pcmh).
21. Bend Memorial Clinic. Patient Centered Medical Home [website]
(https://www.bendmemorialclinic.com/specialities/primary-care/family-medicine/patient-
centered-medical-home/).
22. Schram AP. Medical Home and the Nurse Practitioner: A Policy Analysis. J Nurse
Pract. 2010 Feb 1;6(2):132–9.
23. Rittenhouse DR, Shortell SM, Fisher ES. Primary care and accountable care--two
essential elements of delivery-system reform. N Engl J Med. 2009 Dec
10;361(24):2301–3.
24. Alakeson V. Let patients control the purse strings. BMJ. 2008 Apr 10;336(7648):807–9.
25. Glasby J, Littlechild R. Direct payments and personal budgets: Putting personalisation
into practice. Policy Press; 2016. 270 p.
26. Carlson BL, Foster L, Dale SB, Brown R. Effects of Cash and Counseling on Personal
Care and Well-Being. Health Serv Res. 2007 Feb;42(1 Pt 2):467–87.
27. Jones K, Caiels J, Forder J, Windle K, Welch E, Dolan P, et al. Early Experiences of
Implementing Personal Health Budgets. First interim report. 2010
(http://php.york.ac.uk/inst/spru/pubs/ipp.php?id=1759).
28. The Improving Chronic Illness Care Program. The Chronic Care Model: Improving
Chronic Illness Care [website]
(http://www.improvingchroniccare.org/index.php?p=The_Chronic_Care_Model&s=2).
29. Wagner EH. Care of older people with chronic illness. Older People Build Syst Ased
Evid. 1999;39–64.
30. Coleman K, Austin BT, Brach C, Wagner EH. Evidence on the Chronic Care Model in
the new millennium. Health Aff Proj Hope. 2009 Feb;28(1):75–85.
31. WHO. Innovative Care for Chronic Conditions: Building Blocks for Action. 2002
(http://www.who.int/chp/knowledge/publications/icccglobalreport.pdf?ua=1).
32. Barr VJ, Robinson S, Marin-Link B, Underhill L, Dotts A, Ravensdale D, et al. The
expanded Chronic Care Model: an integration of concepts and strategies from
population health promotion and the Chronic Care Model. Hosp Q. 2003;7(1):73–82.
33. Ham C, Glasby J, Parker H, Smith J. Altogether now? Policy options for integrating
care. Health Services Management Centre. 2008
(http://www.wales.nhs.uk/sitesplus/documents/829/HSMC%20Report%20-
%20Altogether_Now_Report.pdf).
34. Hébert R, Raîche M, Dubois M-F, Gueye NR, Dubuc N, Tousignant M, et al. Impact of
PRISMA, a coordination-type integrated service delivery system for frail older people in
Quebec (Canada): A quasi-experimental study. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci. 2010
Jan;65B(1):107–18.
35. Hébert R, Durand PJ, Dubuc N, Tourigny A. PRISMA: a new model of integrated
service delivery for the frail older people in Canada. Int J Integr Care. 2003;3(1)
(http://www.ijic.org/article/10.5334/ijic.73/).

=== PÁGINA 34 ===
Integrated care models: an overview
Page 24
36. Ham C. Working together for health achievements and challenges in the Kaiser NHS
beacon sites programme. Birmingham: University of Birmingham; 2010. Report No.:
Health services management centre: policy paper 6.
37. Johri M, Beland F, Bergman H. International experiments in integrated care for the
elderly: a synthesis of the evidence. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2003 Mar;18(3):222–35.
38. Åhgren B. Chain of care development in Sweden: results of a national study. Int J
Integr Care. 2003;3 (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1483939/).
39. Nolte E, Knai C, McKee M. Managing chronic conditions. Experience in eight countries.
2008 (http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0008/98414/E92058.pdf).
40. Scottish Executive. Scottish Diabetes Framework. 2002
(http://www.gov.scot/Resource/Doc/46905/0033884.pdf).
41. Busse R, Blumel M. Health Systems in Transition. Germany. Health system review.
2014 (http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0008/255932/HiT-
Germany.pdf?ua=1).
42. Nolte E, Knai C, Hofmarcher M, Conklin A, Erler A, Elissen A, et al. Overcoming
fragmentation in health care: chronic care in Austria, Germany and The Netherlands.
Health Econ Policy Law. 2012 Jan;7(1):125–46.
43. Fuchs S, Henschke C, Blümel M, Busse R. Disease management programs for type 2
diabetes in Germany: a systematic literature review evaluating effectiveness. Dtsch
Arzteblatt Int. 2014 Jun 27;111(26):453–63.
44. Siering U. Germany. Managing chronic conditions: experience in eight countries. 2008.
45. Redaelli M, Meuser S, Stock S. Ambulatory care trends in Germany: a road toward
more integration of care? J Ambulatory Care Manage. 2012 Sep;35(3):182–91.
46. Pines J, Selevan J, McStay F, George M, McClellan M. Kaiser Permanente –
California: A Model for Integrated Care for the Ill and Injured. The Brookings Institution;
2015 (https://www.brookings.edu/wp-
content/uploads/2015/04/050415EmerMedCaseStudyKaiser.pdf).
47. Osakidetza. Chronicity in Basque country. 2010
(http://www.osakidetza.euskadi.eus/r85-
gkgnrl00/es/contenidos/informacion/documentos_cronicos/es_cronic/adjuntos/Chronicit
yBasqueCountry.pdf).
48. Perlin J, Kolodner R, Roswell R. The Veterans Health Administration: Quality, Value,
Accountability, and Information as Transforming Strategies for Patient-Centered Care.
Am J Manag Care. 2004;10 (http://www.ajmc.com/journals/issue/2004/2004-11-vol10-
n11Pt2/Nov04-1955p828-836/).
49. Polanco NT, Zabalegui IB, Irazusta IP, Solinís RN, Del Río Cámara M. Building
integrated care systems: a case study of Bidasoa Integrated Health Organisation. Int J
Integr Care. 2015;15 (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4491322/).
50. Borgemans L, Goodwin N, Vrijhoef B. Project INTEGRATE: A conceptual background
on integrated care for chronic conditions (unpublished paper submitted as deliverable
to European Commission). 2014.
51. Goodwin N, Dixon A, Andreson G, Wodchis W. Providing integrated care for older
people with complex needs. Lessons from seven international case studies. 2014
(http://cdn.basw.co.uk/upload/basw_102418-7.pdf).
52. WHO Regional Office for Europe. The European Framework for Action on Integrated
Health Services Delivery: an overview. 2016
(http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0010/317377/FFA-IHS-service-delivery-
overview.pdf?ua=1).
53. Leutz WN. Five laws for integrating medical and social services: lessons from the
United States and the United Kingdom. Milbank Q. 1999;77(1):77–110, iv – v.
54. Goodwin N, Smith J. The evidence base for integrated care.
2011(http://www.slideshare.net/kingsfund/the-evidence-base-for-integrated-care).

=== PÁGINA 35 ===
Integrated care models: an overview
Page 25
55. McAdam M. Frameworks of Integrated Care for the Elderly: A Systematic Review. 2008
(http://www.cprn.org/documents/49813_EN.pdf).
56. Davies GP, Williams AM, Larsen K, Perkins D, Roland M, Harris MF. Coordinating
primary health care: an analysis of the outcomes of a systematic review. Med J Aust.
2008;188(8) (https://www.mja.com.au/journal/2008/188/8/coordinating-primary-health-
care-analysis-outcomes-systematic-review).
57. Nolte E, Pitchforth E. What is the evidence on the economic impacts of integrated
care? European Observatory on Health Systems and Policies; 2014
(http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0019/251434/What-is-the-evidence-on-
the-economic-impacts-of-integrated-care.pdf).
58. Goodwin N, Shapiro J. The road to integrated care working. Health Services
Management Centre, University of Birmingham; 2001.
59. Pan American Health Organization. Integrated Health Service Delivery Networks:
Concepts, Policy Options and a Road Map for Implementation in the Americas. 2011
(http://new.paho.org/hq/dmdocuments/2011/PHC_IHSD-2011Serie4.pdf).
60. Berenson RA, Hammons T, Gans DN, Zuckerman S, Merrell K, Underwood WS, et al.
A house is not a home: keeping patients at the center of practice redesign. Health Aff
Proj Hope. 2008 Oct;27(5):1219–30.
61. Bengoa R. Transforming health care: an approach to system-wide implementation. Int J
Integr Care 2013:13(3) (http://www.ijic.org/article/10.5334/ijic.1206/).
62. Minkman MM. The current state of integrated care: an overview. J Integr Care.
2012;20(6):346–58.
63. Advancing Quality Alliance (AQuA). System Integration Improvement Resources. 2014
(http://www.nhsemployers.org/~/media/Employers/Documents/Campaigns/Do%20OD/
AQuASystemIntegrationImprovementResourcesFinal0404141.pdf).

=== PÁGINA 36 ===
Integrated care models: an overview
Page 26
Annexes
Annex 1. Domains and essential attributes for the development of integrated health
service delivery networks
Level of progress in the attributes that make up the Integrated Health
Service Delivery Network
Essential
Domain
I II
attribute III
Fragmented Partially integrated
Integrated network
Network network
1. Population No definition of Defined population/ Defined population/
and territory population/territory territory under its territory under its
under its responsibility responsibility, but with responsibility and
limited knowledge of extensive knowledge of
the health needs of the health needs of this
this population population, which
determine the supply of
health services
2. Service Non-existent, very Includes all or most An extensive network of
delivery limited or restricted to levels of care, but with health care facilities that
the first level of care high predominance of includes all levels of care
personal health and provides and
services integrates both personal
and public health
services
3. First level of Predominance of Acts as a gateway to Acts as a gateway to the
Model of care care vertical programs with the system but with system, integrates and
no integration or very low capacity to coordinates care, and
coordination resolve health meets the majority of the
problems and poor population’s health needs
integration of services
4. Specialized Deregulated access to Regulated access to Delivery of specialized
care specialists specialized care, but services is done
predominance of preferably in non-hospital
hospitals settings
5. No coordination of Existence of Existence of coordination
Coordination care coordination mechanisms throughout
of care mechanisms, but that the entire continuum of
do not cover the entire care
continuum of care
6. Focus of Centred on disease Centred on the person Centred on the person,
care the family and the
community/ territory

=== PÁGINA 37 ===
Integrated care models: an overview
Page 27
Domains and essential attributes for the development of integrated health service
delivery networks (continued)
Level of progress in the attributes that make up the Integrated Health
Service Delivery Network
Essential
Domain I II
attribute III
Fragmented Partially integrated
Integrated network
Network network
7. Governance No clear governance Multiple instances of A unified system of
function governance that governance for the entire
function independently network
of each other
Governance
8. Participation No instances for Instances for Broad social participation
and strategy social participation participation are
limited
9. Intersectoral No links with other Links with other social Intersectoral action
approach sectors sectors beyond the social sectors
10. Non-integrated Integrated Integrated management
Management management of management of clinical of the clinical,
of support support systems support but without administrative and
systems integration of the logistical support
administrative and systems
logistical support
systems
11. Human Insufficient for the Sufficient, but with Sufficient, competent,
resources needs of the network deficiencies in the committed and valued by
technical the network
competencies and
Organization
commitment to the
and
network
management
12. No information system Multiple systems with Integrated information
Information no communication system that links all
systems among them network members with
data disaggregated
according to pertinent
variables
13. No measurement of Measurement of Measurement of
Performance performance and performance centered performance centered on
and results results on inputs and health outcomes and
processes user satisfaction

=== PÁGINA 38 ===
Integrated care models: an overview
Page 28
Domains and essential attributes for the development of integrated health service
delivery networks (continued)
Level of progress in the attributes that make up the Integrated Health
Service Delivery Network
Essential
Domain I II
attribute III
Fragmented Partially integrated
Integrated network
Network network
14. Funding Insufficient and Adequate financing but Adequate funding and
Financial
irregular with unaligned financial incentives
allocation and
financial incentives aligned with network
incentives goals
Source: PAHO. 2011. Integrated Health Service Delivery Networks: Concepts, Policy Options and a Road Map for
Implementation in the Americas. Washington, D.C.: PAHO.

=== PÁGINA 39 ===
Integrated care models: an overview
Page 29
Annex 2. Overview of the project INTEGRATE findings
Project INTEGRATE is a research project initiated in 2012 within the European Union
Framework Programme 7 with the purpose of understanding how to best build integrated
systems of care through a comparison of different approaches (e.g. disease and non-
disease based) in different country contexts (Borgemans et al 2014). As part of the design of
the case methodology, a systematic review of the evidence for the successful adoption of
integrated care was undertaken. As a result, a composite list of 22 key variables for the
successful development of integrated care was defined:
1. Leadership at the national, regional and local level of care:
a. macro-goals of care
b. health in all policies
c. evaluation of integrated care policies against attributes of high quality integrated
care
d. clinical leadership
e. standardization of the system's gatekeeper role
f. regulation of access to specialized care
2. Data on chronic illnesses
3. Adequate financing system linked with quality improvement
4. An adequate workforce (in terms of numbers)
5. An adequate workforce (in terms of competencies and distribution)
6. Essential and new pharmaceuticals and medical devices
7. Investments in health services research
8. Roles of actors and their added value to the care process are defined (primary,
secondary, tertiary and social care)
9. Revision of professional roles wherever appropriate
10. Coordination (structures) and ‘shared-care protocols’
11. Access to expertise to help with changes
12. Project managers (owners) and solid project management
13. Evidence-based guidelines
14. [Clinician] [post-graduate] education
15. Decision aids to patients
16. Reminders to clinicians and patients
17. Techniques for quality control: audit and feedback
18. Patient education
19. Patient empowerment
20. Intelligence systems for data collection
21. Computerized clinical support systems
22. Interactive health communication applications for patients
Source: Borgermans L, Goodwin N, Vrijhoef B, Ovretveit J, Calciolari S. 2014. Project INTEGRATE: A conceptual
background on integrated care for chronic conditions (unpublished paper submitted as deliverable to European
Commission).

=== PÁGINA 40 ===
Integrated care models: an overview
Page 30
Annex 3. Key lessons for the successful adoption of integrated care
System level
(cid:131) Recognise the importance of addressing this agenda of integrated care for frail older people
(cid:131) Provide stimulus through funding or other means to support the development of local initiatives to improve care
for this group of people
(cid:131) Avoid a top-down policy that requires structural or organisational mergers
(cid:131) Remove barriers that make it more difficult for localities to integrate care, such as differences in financing and
eligibility
Organizational level
(cid:131) There is no single organisational model or approach that best supports integrated care
(cid:131) The starting point should be a clinical/service model designed to improve the care that is provided rather than an
organisational model with a pre-determined design
(cid:131) It takes time for approaches to integrated care to develop and mature, with most programmes constantly evolving
(cid:131) Fully integrated organisations are not the (end) goal
Functional level
(cid:131) Success appears to be related to good communication and relationships between those receiving care and the
professionals and managers involved in delivering care
(cid:131) Greater use of ICT is potentially an important enabler of integrated care, but does not appear to be a necessary
condition for it
(cid:131) Building relationships to support integrated care requires time to build social capital and foster trust
Professional level
(cid:131) Professionals need to work together in multidisciplinary teams or provider networks – generalists and specialists,
in health and social care
(cid:131) Within teams, professionals need to have well-defined roles, and work in partnership with colleagues in a shared
care approach
(cid:131) In most of the case study programmes, care co-ordination was being delivered alongside rather than by primary
care physicians. This suggests that patients with complex needs that span health and social care may require an
intensity of support that is beyond what primary care physicians can deliver.
Service level
(cid:131) A number of common elements in the design of the care process at a service level appear to be important. These
include:
— holistic care assessments
— care planning
— a single point of entry
— care co-ordination
— the availability of a well-connected provider network that can facilitate access to the necessary support,
particularly for self-management

=== PÁGINA 41 ===
Overview of models for integrated health services delivery
Page 31
Key lessons for the successful adoption of integrated care (continued)
Personal level
(cid:131) All case studies had a specific focus on working with individuals and informal carers to support self-management
(cid:131) Continuity of care and care co-ordination to meet individuals’ specific needs is important and highly valued
(cid:131) Personal contact with a named care co-ordinator and/or case manager is more effective than remote monitoring or
telephone-based support
Source: Goodwin N, Sonola L, Thiel V, Kodner D. 2014. Coordinated care for people with complex chronic conditions. Key
lessons and markers for success. The King’s Fund, London.

=== PÁGINA 42 ===
Page 32
The WHO R e gional
Office for Europe
The World H ealth
Organization (WHO) is a
specialized agency of the
United Nations created in
1948 with the primary
responsibility for
international health matters
and public health. The WHO
Regional Office for Europe
is one of six regional offices
throughout the world, each
with its own programme
geared to the particular
health conditions of the
countries it serves.
Member States
Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czechia
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyzstan
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Republic of Moldova
Romania
Russian Federation
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Tajikistan
The former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Uzbekistan
World Health Organization
Regional Office for Europe
UN City, Marmorvej 51, DK-2100 Copenhagen Ø, Denmark
Tel.: +45 45 33 70 00 Fax: +45 45 33 70 01 Email: contact@euro.who.int
Website: www.euro.who.int
