# Fonte: WHO-EURO-2023-7497-47264-69316-eng.pdf
# Páginas: 61

=== PÁGINA 1 ===
Primary heath care
policy paper series
Population
health management in
primary health care:
a proactive approach to improve
health and well-being
001

=== PÁGINA 2 ===
Document number: WHO/EURO:2023-7497-47264-69316
© World Health Organization 2023
Some rights reserved. This work is available under the Creative Commons Attribu-
tion-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO licence (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO; https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/igo).
Under the terms of this licence, you may copy, redistribute and adapt the work for
non-commercial purposes, provided the work is appropriately cited, as indicated
below. In any use of this work, there should be no suggestion that WHO endorses
any specific organization, products or services. The use of the WHO logo is not
permitted. If you adapt the work, then you must license your work under the same or
equivalent Creative Commons licence. If you create a translation of this work, you
should add the following disclaimer along with the suggested citation: “This transla-
tion was not created by the World Health Organization (WHO). WHO is not responsi-
ble for the content or accuracy of this translation. The original English edition shall
be the binding and authentic edition: Population health management in primary
health care: a proactive approach to improve health and well-being. Primary heath
care policy paper series. Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office for Europe; 2023”.
Any mediation relating to disputes arising under the licence shall be conducted in
accordance with the mediation rules of the World Intellectual Property Organization
(http://www.wipo.int/amc/en/mediation/rules/).
Suggested citation. Population health management in primary health care: a
proactive approach to improve health and well-being. Primary heath care
policy paper series. Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office for Europe; 2023. Licence:
CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO.
Cataloguing-in-Publication (CIP) data. CIP data are available at http://apps.who.
int/iris.
Sales, rights and licensing. To purchase WHO publications, see http://apps.who.int/
bookorders. To submit requests for commercial use and queries on rights and licens-
ing, see https://www.who.int/about/policies/publishing/copyright
Third-party materials. If you wish to reuse material from this work that is attributed
to a third party, such as tables, figures or images, it is your responsibility to deter-
mine whether permission is needed for that reuse and to obtain permission from the
copyright holder. The risk of claims resulting from infringement of any third-party-
owned component in the work rests solely with the user.
General disclaimers. The designations employed and the presentation of the
material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever
on the part of WHO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area
or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Dot-
ted and dashed lines on maps represent approximate border lines for which there
may not yet be full agreement.
The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not
imply that they are endorsed or recommended by WHO in preference to others of a
similar nature that are not mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the names of
proprietary products are distinguished by initial capital letters.
All reasonable precautions have been taken by WHO to verify the information
contained in this publication. However, the published material is being distributed
without warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied. The responsibility for the
interpretation and use of the material lies with the reader. In no event shall WHO be
liable for damages arising from its use.
All photos: ©WHO
Design: Lars Møller

=== PÁGINA 3 ===
Population health management
in primary health care:
a proactive approach to improve
health and well-being
Primary health care policy paper series

=== PÁGINA 4 ===
Abstract
Population health management can play a critical role in strengthening
primary health care (PHC) by providing a data-driven, people-centred and
proactive approach to managing the health and well-being of a defined
population. By identifying subgroups with similar characteristics and needs,
population health management can enable PHC providers to move from a
one-size-fits-all approach to targeted and tailored interventions that
account for the needs of different groups and individuals. By focusing on the
social determinants of health and psychosocial needs, population health
management can help PHC providers in adopting a holistic and
proportionate universalism approach to address health inequalities at the
community level. This publication identifies key success factors at the
system, organizational and clinical levels to enable population health
management in PHC. It includes 12 country examples from across the WHO
European Region showing how population health management is used in
PHC. The publication provides a set of 16 policy actions to help PHC
providers move towards a population health management approach that
are classified following the PHC levers of the WHO Operational Framework
for Primary Health Care.
Keywords
Population Health Management
Primary Health Care
Delivery of Health care
Social Determinants of Health
Health Care Reform

=== PÁGINA 5 ===
CONTENTS
Acknowledgements ...............................................................................................................iv
Executive summary ................................................................................................................v
About this policy paper ......................................................................1
Why is interest growing in population health management? ...1
Why is population health management particularly relevant
for PHC? .................................................................................................3
The population health management cycle ....................................7
1. Defining and identifying the population .................................................................8
2. Health assessment and population segmentation .............................................9
3. Risk stratification and impactibility..........................................................................15
4. Tailored service delivery ................................................................................................21
5. Evaluation...........................................................................................................................28
Enabling population health management ...................................32
Recommended policy actions .........................................................38
References ...........................................................................................41

=== PÁGINA 6 ===
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This policy paper was prepared by the WHO European Center for Primary Health
Care.
The manuscript was written by Dan Alton (General Practitioner and National Clinical
Advisor, Population Health Management, NHS, England), Marc Bruijnzeels (Associate
Professor and Educational Director for Population Health Management, Leiden
University Medical Centre, Netherlands), José Cerezo Cerezo (Health Policy Analyst,
WHO European Centre for Primary Health Care) and Esteban de Manuel Keenoy
(Former CEO, Kronikgune (currently, Biosistemak), Institute for Health Systems
Research, Basque Country, Spain).
José Cerezo Cerezo (Health Policy Analyst, WHO European Centre for Primary Health
Care), Toni Dedeu (Senior Advisor, WHO European Centre for Primary Health Care),
Melitta Jakab (Head of Office, WHO European Centre for Primary Health Care) and
Arnodas Jurgutis (Technical Officer, WHO European Centre for Primary Health Care)
provided technical editing.
A sounding board comprising Altyn Aringazina (Professor, Almaty Management
University, Kazakhstan), Nigel Edwards (Chief Executive, Nuffield Trust), Joana
Madureira Lima (International Policy Adviser, WHO Country Office in Kyrgyzstan),
Neringa Tarvydiene (Director of Public Health, Klaipeda Municipality, Lithuania), Pia
Vracko (Senior Advisor, National Public Health Institute, Slovenia) provided key
comments and input to several drafts both in writing and during four sounding board
review meetings.
Bayan Babaeva (Paediatrician, National master trainer on the Universal Progressive
Patronage Model, Kazakhstan) and Aigul Kuttumuratova (Technical Officer, WHO
European Centre for Primary Health Care) developed the country box on Kazakhstan.
Pia Vracko (Senior Advisor, National Public Health Institute, Slovenia) developed the
country box on Slovenia and Neringa Tarvydiene (Director of Public Health, Klaipeda
Municipality, Lithuania) and Arnoldas Jurgutis (Technical Officer, WHO European
Centre for Primary Health Care) the country box on Lithuania. Sara Calderón-
Larrañaga (General Practitioner, Bromley by Bow Health Partnership and PhD
candidate, Queen Mary University of London, England) wrote the box on social
prescribing. Arnoldas Jurgutis (Technical Officer, WHO European Centre for Primary
Health Care) produced the box on population segmentation in health systems with a
dispensarization heritage. The authors produced the other country boxes. Sara
Darias-Curvo (Tenured Professor, Public Health, University of La Laguna, and
Consultant, WHO European Office for Investment for Health and Development)
provided comments to an early draft.
This paper was reviewed by Natasha Azzopardi-Muscat (Director, Division of Country
Health Policies and Systems, WHO Regional Office for Europe); David Novillo Ortiz
(Unit Head, Data and Digital Health, WHO Regional Office for Europe); Stefania
Davia (Technical Officer, Data Monitoring, Analysis and Forecasting, WHO Regional
Office for Europe); Helen Caton Peters (Technical Officer, Digital Health, WHO
Regional Office for Europe); Jill Farrington (Regional Medical Officer, Cardiovascular
Diseases and Diabetes, WHO Regional Office for Europe); and Stefanie Claire Gissing
(Consultant, Cardiovascular Diseases and Diabetes, WHO Regional Office for
Europe).
iv

=== PÁGINA 7 ===
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Interest is growing in population health management, driven by several
well-known pressures on health systems in the WHO European Region,
including: the rapid growth of multimorbidity and disability driven by
improved survival and ageing; increasing health-care costs in a context of
limited resources and budget constraints; rising health inequalities; and
rising and changing patient expectations. The COVID-19 pandemic has
intensified some of these long-lasting pressures and brought new
challenges.
These forces call for greater emphasis on prevention and greater
appreciation of the social determinants of health to improve population
health and reduce health inequalities. Innovative approaches such as
population health management rooted in primary health care (PHC) can
substantially contribute to this shift. The relationship between population
health management and PHC is that of a virtuous circle. Population health
management helps to make PHC more effective, and many elements of a
strong PHC model are essential for effective population health
management.
Population health management is defined here as a people centred, data-
driven and proactive approach to manage the health and well-being of a
defined population, considering the differences within that population and
their social determinants of health. Population health management entails
data-driven assessment of the health status of a specific population
followed by prediction of health outcomes and anticipating the resources
needed to proactively address these.
The most important elements of population health management can be
summarized through a cycle of five subsequent steps. It can be performed in
any health system if it is adapted to contextual strategic objectives,
available resources and health system maturity. The cycle consists of
defining and identifying the population; health assessment and
segmentation; risk stratification and impactibility; tailored service delivery;
and evaluation and improvement.
Population health management can substantially contribute to realizing
some of PHC’s central attributes, including person-centeredness;
accessibility; comprehensiveness; attention to health problems in their
physical, mental, social, cultural and existential dimensions; continuity;
coordination and community orientation. It can do this by supporting PHC
providers in:
• moving from a one-size-fits-all approach to targeted and tailored
approaches that account for the needs of different groups within local
catchment populations or population clusters with similar needs or
health conditions;
• moving from passive and reactive to proactive care, ensuring that people
with different risks are identified and have their care anticipated;
• moving from a narrow focus on clinical needs to a holistic approach
focusing also on psychosocial needs and the social determinants of
health; and
v

=== PÁGINA 8 ===
• moving from fragmented and poorly coordinated care to better
coordination and integration with secondary and tertiary care and
partnership with other sectors and actors in the community.
Although moving towards system-wide implementation of population
health management requires several years of development work and takes
time to achieve impact, population health management can promote
improvements in PHC even before the full benefits of population health
management are realized. Key and common success factors to enable
population health management in PHC are described here as system (such
as information governance arrangements that promote information sharing
within and outside the health system, data stewardship capacity and skills
and support of regulatory agencies); organizational (multidisciplinary and
networked PHC models and integration and close collaboration with public
health and social care agencies); and clinical-level factors (such as
comprehensive and systematic data collection in PHC and patient and
community engagement).
The recommended policy actions to help countries move towards population
health management are grouped here following the PHC levers of the WHO
Operational Framework for Primary Health Care. This aims to underscore
three important considerations: (1) Population health management is most
effective within a holistic health system strengthening approach with PHC
at its core. (2) Investing in PHC is paramount since it is the best place to
engage in population health management approaches. (3) Achieving
maximum impact requires synergistic action spanning over several or all
PHC levers.
PHC Levers Recommended policy actions
Governance and policy 1. Establish a clear policy framework and
frameworks governance arrangements for population
health management at all levels, ensuring a
shared vision, properly defined roles and
responsibilities, a stepwise implementation
strategy and accountability mechanisms in
place.
2. Adjust current legislation and regulations to
enable population health management by
promoting interdisciplinary governance
structures, data sharing, interoperability and
integration.
Funding and allocation 3. Use population health management to
of resources contribute to the informed decision-making
process for efficient and equity-sensitive
funding and allocation of resources in PHC.
vi

=== PÁGINA 9 ===
PHC Levers Recommended policy actions
Engagement of the 4. Establish a network of population health
community and other management champions to share
stakeholders experience, draw lessons learned and
support implementation. Ensure that
champions include frontline clinical and
non-clinical PHC workers and professional
associations, health managers and planners
and implementers.
5. Encourage PHC providers to map the
community resources and stakeholders
(local government, nongovernmental
organizations, patient organizations,
charities, cultural resources etc.) active in
their catchment area and establish
mechanisms to engage them in the whole
population health management cycle and
develop strategies for activating patients.
Models of care 6. Incentivize PHC organizations to engage in
population health management by making
them formally responsible for the population
outcomes of a stable, clearly identified and
registered population, usually as part of a
defined catchment area.
7. Move progressively towards risk-stratified
models of care in which multidisciplinary
PHC teams provide coordinated care based
on a wider range of people’s needs and their
determinants.
PHC workforce 8. Create a learning environment for
population health management by updating
existing or developing new educational
programmes and postgraduate professional
training, including continual review and
improvement cycles.
Purchasing and 9. Adjust current payment systems to
payment systems stimulate population health management
and promote provider autonomy, early
detection and condition management, task
profile expansion, interdisciplinary work and
intersectoral activities (through, for example,
capitation, pay for performance, pay for
coordination or shared savings
arrangements).
vii

=== PÁGINA 10 ===
PHC Levers Recommended policy actions
Digital and data 10. Enhance population health management by
technologies for health ensuring the sharing of data within the
health system (between services or levels of
care) and move progressively towards
sharing, interoperability and integration with
other sectors, such as social care.
11. Enhance population health management by
stimulating data quality, storage, integration
and stewardship in PHC and invest in tools
that allow PHC professionals to visualize
population segmentation and stratification
results in a clear and digestible manner.
12. Invest in the digitalization of PHC as part of
an overall system-wide, long-term, health
information system strategy that sets a clear
vision and objectives on population health
management and is context specific.
Systems for improving 13. Use population segmentation and risk
data-driven quality of stratification tools in PHC to improve the
care quality of care, enhance clinical decision-
making, tailor service delivery, reach out
proactively to patients and seek out
population cohorts experiencing health
inequalities.
14. Create professional awareness and
competencies among PHC professionals to
appreciate the use of data analysis and the
potential of predictive models to contribute
to improving service delivery and planning
and implementing targeted programmes for
all risk strata.
15. Promote the use of sociodemographic data
by PHC professionals throughout the
population health management cycle.
Monitoring and 16. Regularly plan, monitor and review the
evaluation performance of the population health
management inputs, processes and results
to enhance equity, efficiency, effectiveness
and impact.
viii

=== PÁGINA 11 ===
ABOUT THIS POLICY PAPER
The aim of this policy paper is to showcase the opportunities and benefits
that adopting a population health management approach offers to health
systems and especially how it is a key part of an approach to strengthening
primary health care (PHC). In doing so, this paper will:
• introduce the concept of population health management and explain the
methods and rationale for applying it;
• describe how population health management can support PHC;
• explain the key elements of population health management and the
PHC-specific applications;
• provide recommendations on how to implement population health
management in PHC; and
• provide practical country-specific examples on using population health
management in PHC.
The target audience of this policy paper are national and subnational policy-
makers and implementers in the WHO European Region who are responsible
for leading PHC reform and strengthening efforts. These include decision-
makers in health ministries, public health departments and centres, PHC
organizations and health purchasing agencies. Even if there is not an
immediate intention to move towards system-wide implementation of
population health management, many of the steps towards it will also
strengthen PHC and other aspects of the effectiveness of the health system.
WHY IS INTEREST GROWING IN
POPULATION HEALTH MANAGEMENT?
There are several well-known pressures on health systems in the WHO
European Region, including (1–3):
• rapid growth of multimorbidity and disability driven by improved survival
and ageing;
• increasing health-care costs in a context of limited resources and budget
constraints;
• rising health inequalities; and
• rising and changing patient expectations.
The COVID-19 pandemic has intensified some of these long-lasting
pressures and brought new challenges (4–6). Its impact has been greater in
the most disadvantaged groups in society, and the gap in levels of
well-being between those with low incomes and those with high incomes
has increased by 50% since the pandemic (7). This adds to previous trends
on widening health inequalities since 1990s, due to less progress achieved
among lower socioeconomic groups, which can result in stagnation in
progress across various health indicators (8). The pandemic has also
highlighted that, within any given population, some subgroups need
additional support since they bear a higher risk of contracting COVID-19
(such as workers that cannot telework and people living in small and
crowded households) or developing a more severe disease (such as
individuals with pre-existing conditions and older people); or they face
greater barriers to accessing health-care services (such as marginalized and
underserved populations).
1

=== PÁGINA 12 ===
As part of this, there is growing consensus that there should be greater
emphasis on prevention and greater appreciation of the social determinants
of health to improve population health and reduce health inequalities. This
calls for innovative approaches to how health care is provided, and
population health management can offer part of this solution (9). By
supporting health systems and PHC providers addressing health inequalities
and reaching out to those that are often left behind, population health
management can strengthen health systems’ contribution to building
healthier, safer and more cohesive societies and then towards building
well-being economies (10).
Countries’ interest and investment in digital solutions is increasing as they
seek to build more resilient health systems in the recovery phase from the
COVID-19 pandemic by introducing new ways of working. Developing digital
approaches to managing health at the population level, with the aim of
moving health and well-being from reactive care models to active
By community-based and disease prevention models is a key regional focus
supporting health area of the regional digital health action plan for the WHO European Region
systems and PHC 2023–2030 approved by all Member States (11). This opens a window of
providers addressing health opportunity for population health management since greater digital
inequalities and reaching out to maturity is a major enabling factor for advanced population health
those that are often left behind, management. Big data is becoming widespread across sectors as a driver
population health management of insights, innovation and new interventions (12). Enabling the delivery to
can strengthen health systems’ decision-makers and practitioners of a volume and variety of structured
contribution to building or unstructured data not previously possible entails a new impetus and
healthier, safer and more multiplies the potential for a data-driven approach such as population
cohesive societies. health management (12). Big data can be paramount in intervention and
research activities to accelerate progress in disease prevention in population
health. It has been shown to enhance precision in the population health
management process, including population segmentation, risk stratification
and targeting interventions for individuals and homogeneous
subpopulations (12–14).
Although population health management has no single, clear, agreed
definition, there is a broad consensus about its key elements (15). Population
health management is defined here as a people-centred, data-driven and
proactive approach to managing the health and well-being of a defined
population, considering the differences within that population and their
social determinants of health. Population health management entails
data-driven assessment of the health status of a specific population
followed by prediction of health outcomes and anticipating the resources
needed to proactively address these. This involves several processes
forming the population health management cycle (described in detail in
Section 4) that enable the population to be classified into subgroups with
similar characteristics for which targeted and tailored interventions best
serve their health needs. The social determinants of health are at the heart
of population health management, since they strongly influence health
outcomes and drive health inequalities (16). Thus, education, socioeconomic
and employment status, working conditions and housing, environmental and
other factors are key areas of focus throughout the population health
management cycle. Population health management interventions span over
the entire continuum of care: for instance, they may be related to promoting
healthy living or disease prevention activities and also to programmes to
manage high-risk people with multimorbidity.
2

=== PÁGINA 13 ===
In this way, population health management can enable and/or enhance the
following health system governance processes and clinical care approaches
that are especially relevant for PHC, which will be illustrated theoretically
and through practical country examples throughout the paper:
• evidence-informed, data-driven health planning;
• identifying care gaps and the most efficient interventions to address
them and who would benefit the most within a defined population;
• Identifying the factors driving health inequalities and delivering effective
interventions to address them;
• proactive and tailored care across the care continuum to population
subgroups or segments with similar health needs and/or risks to improve
key health outcomes; and
• coordinating across care levels and identifying levers at local or regional
level to improve health, even if these are outside the health-care system.
By doing so, population health management supports health systems to
achieve the quintuple aim: enhancing the experience of care; improving the
health and well-being of the population; reducing the per capita cost of
health care and improving productivity; addressing health and care
inequalities; and increasing the well-being and engagement of the
workforce (17,18).
WHY IS POPULATION HEALTH
MANAGEMENT PARTICULARLY
RELEVANT FOR PHC?
Population health management can substantially contribute to realizing
some of PHC’s central attributes, including person-centredness;
accessibility; comprehensiveness; attention to health problems in their
physical, mental, social, cultural and existential dimensions; continuity;
coordination and community orientation (Fig. 1) (19,20).
It can do this by supporting PHC providers in:
• moving from a one-size-fits-all approach to targeted and tailored
approaches that account for the needs of different groups within local
catchment populations or population clusters with similar needs or
health conditions;
• moving from passive and reactive to proactive care, ensuring that people
with different risks are identified and have their care anticipated;
• moving from a narrow focus on clinical needs to a holistic approach
focusing also on psychosocial needs and the social determinants of
health; and
• moving from fragmented and poorly coordinated care to better
coordination and integration with secondary and tertiary care and
partnership with other sectors and actors in the community.
The essential public health functions are at the core of a PHC approach as a
recognition of the need to go beyond clinical, curative services to realize
PHC’s full potential in improving population health (21,22). Integrating
essential public health functions and focusing on monitoring and evaluating
3

=== PÁGINA 14 ===
population health needs at the community level is a focus area under core
priority one, moving towards universal health coverage, in the WHO
European Programme of Work, 2020–2025 (23). The steps of the population
health management cycle (see next section) provide a pragmatic framework
to help PHC providers in operationalizing several of them, including: (1)
monitoring and evaluating the population’s health status, health service
utilization and surveillance of risk factors and threats to health; (2)
supporting efficient and effective health systems and multisectoral planning,
financing and management for population health; (3) promoting the
prevention and early detection of diseases, including noncommunicable and
communicable diseases; (4) promoting health and well-being and actions to
Fig. 1. Four key moves
address the wider determinants of health and inequity; (5) ensuring
supported by population
community engagement, participation and social mobilization for health
health management to
and well-being; and (6) assuring the quality of and access to health services.
help to realize PHC
attributes
Four key moves supported by population health management Selected primary
health care attributes
From one
To tailored to need
size fits all
First contact
From passive To proactive and
Continuity
and reactive anticipatory
Comprehensiveness
To greater focus on
From biomedically psychosocial and
Coordination
focused social determinants
of health
Community
orientation
From To coordination
fragmentation and integration
Moreover, by providing sophisticated understanding of populations and
their determinants that enables them to be classified into subgroups with
similar characteristics and needs, population health management can help
PHC and public health services to deploy a proportionate universalism
approach to address health inequalities at the community level: reducing
the steepness of the social gradient in health through universal actions but
with a scale and intensity that is proportionate to the level of disadvantage
(24).
In summary, the relationship between population health management and
PHC can be described as a virtuous circle. Population health management
helps make PHC more effective, and many elements of a strong PHC model
(such as multidisciplinary teams, larger-scale PHC and integration with
public health services) are essential for effective population health
4

=== PÁGINA 15 ===
management. Thus, regardless of the situation of PHC in a country or region,
population health management can drive the health of the population.
Section 5 discusses PHC-specific elements as factors for success for
population health management.
PHC professionals often already have deep understanding of the population
that they serve, their needs and the wider determinants of their health. A
data-driven population health management approach does not replace this
understanding but rather complements it, quantifies it, enables even deeper
understanding and, at times, can challenge pre-existing assumptions. PHC
professionals’ understanding of their community (in which they often live)
naturally facilitates population health management as an effective
approach within PHC. There are resultant benefits when clinicians
participate in leading this transformational change, even though most of
the day-to-day work required is often not done by the clinicians themselves
and, in fact, often reduces their workload.
The country example described below provides a practical example of the
moves mentioned above. The next section describes the key elements of
population health management; under each of them, PHC-specific
applications are presented.
Country example 1: Improving diabetes care through population health management in
ENGLAND, Berkshire West, part of Buckinghamshire, Oxfordshire and Berkshire
UNITED KINGDOM West Integrated Care System
Berkshire West is a geographical area covering about 500 000 people.
For several years, there has been close collaboration across primary,
secondary and tertiary health care, local government, patient groups
and the voluntary sector, to create a coordinated environment to
provide holistic care driven by population health management.
Using linked population health data from PHC, secondary health care
and mental health, Berkshire West’s team identified variation in the
health outcomes among people with type 2 diabetes. With further
segmentation and stratification, a cohort of the population was
identified that appeared to need dedicated attention because of
poorer outcomes: people with type 2 diabetes who often had a
background diagnosis of anxiety or depression and who were
overweight. These people were identified as having a very high risk of
complications from diabetes and, moreover, frequently as poor users
of the standard NHS diabetes education offered. The data analysis
also revealed that this cohort was especially present in two areas
within Berkshire West.
This finding was the first step of an iterative process aimed at
harnessing the on-the-ground intelligence to go beyond the numbers
and better characterize the cohort. The participatory process included
several discussions with the people within this cohort, led by their PHC
team (their own trusted clinicians) and with diabetes lead nurses in
practices within primary care networks (25). These discussions were
often carried out by the patients’ own general practitioners, who the
patients knew and trusted, simply telephoning the patients in the
cohort and asking them whether they would be willing to speak about
5

=== PÁGINA 16 ===
their diabetes and lives more generally. This was initially done as part
of the NHS England Population Health Management development
programme, which allowed dedicated time and support for this new
way of working.
The process was vital to conclude that the problems faced were
different in each of the two main areas of residence of the identified
cohort, reflecting varying populations. Thus, clinical leads for
population health management within each local area (called
population health clinical ambassadors) developed tailored
approaches to deliver nuanced diabetes services based on the main
characteristics and determinants of health in their respective
populations.
In South Reading, many of the people in the group were from the
Nepalese community who faced language, cultural and practical
barriers to engage with primary care networks and have their diabetes
reviewed. To address this, a new programme targeted to their needs
was implemented to provide group education sessions coordinated
and delivered within general practice surgeries but backed up by a
diabetes lead consultant at the hospital. The programme was
developed jointly with the community and with the leadership of a
Nepalese-speaking general practitioner.
In Wokingham North, an economically affluent area with a high
percentage of commuters into London, a different issue was identified.
Since diabetes review appointments were scheduled in the week, often
during work hours, the cohort’s patients sometimes struggled to get
to them. In addition, conversations with patients showed that they
were interested in understanding more about how their stress and
behaviour were affecting their diabetes and not just being told to eat
less sugar and given more medication. A diabetes evening clinic was
therefore set up to provide group education as well as a general
practitioner intervention centred on addressing risk factors, devoting
time to discuss with patients (and sometimes also their spouses, who
were invited to attend) how stress, exercise and eating habits can all
synergistically contribute to diabetes outcomes.
Early findings indicate that, for both groups of patients, their average
blood glucose levels are now better controlled (an improvement in
average glycated haemoglobin three months after the intervention
versus baseline of 8.6 and 8.1 (26) for the South Reading and
Wokingham North interventions, respectively). However, a variety of
other outcomes are being measured to assess the programme’s
effectiveness, including measuring longer-term outcomes. Moreover,
personnel motivation has increased with the deployment of a
population health management approach, since they feel more
involved in designing services.
6

=== PÁGINA 17 ===
THE POPULATION HEALTH
MANAGEMENT CYCLE
This paper uses a cycle comprising five subsequent steps to review the most
important elements of population health management: defining and
identifying the population, health assessment and segmentation, risk
stratification and impactibility (27)1, tailored service delivery and evaluation
and improvement (Fig. 2).
Fig. 2. The population
health management cycle
5. Evaluation 1.Population
and definition and
improvement identification
2. Health
4. Tailored
assessment
service
and population
delivery
segmentation
3. Risk
stratification
and impactability
modelling
The population health management cycle can be performed in any health
system. The whole process is directed towards achieving defined population
health objectives and has to be aligned with the objectives and local
resources of the health system. The implementation details depend on the
aims, maturity of health and social services, data availability, health
information systems, availability, competences and profile of health-care
professionals in the national and local settings, as discussed in the following
sections. Thus, there is no unique way of going through the five steps of the
cycle.
Although the cycle provides a good theoretical framework and helps in
structuring the paper, three points must be considered to better understand
how population health management works in practice.
• The boundaries between the steps may not be necessarily clear-cut and
overlaps and iteration back and forth can happen. For instance, in many
cases, interventions are directly implemented after population
segmentation without engaging in risk stratification.
1 The degree to which various subpopulations are likely to benefit from a range of interventions.
7

=== PÁGINA 18 ===
• The role of frontline PHC professionals in each step may differ 2
considerably depending on the health system context and the service
delivery model. For instance, risk stratification results can be provided to
PHC professionals, but they can lead on the tailored service delivery or
be involved in health needs assessment for a specific risk stratum along
with public health teams.
• Decisions on population health management can be taken at various
governance levels and by various actors. For instance, regional, national
or local health authorities may decide to adopt a specific risk
stratification tool or plan a tailored programme. However, how such tools
are used in practice or how services are delivered can vary locally and/or
across PHC practices.
These points are highly context-specific and are illustrated throughout the
multiple country examples included in this section.
1 Defining and identifying the population
The first step in population health management is defining a target
population. This sets the basis to not only offer health-care interventions
(for instance, from preventive to curative services) to those seeking them
but also to reach out to those who do not show up in practice. This way,
vulnerable individuals and populations can be identified and offered
appropriate care even before they develop an illness or condition or its
complications. This also improves understanding of the interface between
individual health and its broader determinants and therefore enables more
effective interventions to be designed that can address the root causes of
diseases, taking advantage of economies of scale.
There are different approaches to defining the target population in
population health management depending on the overall scope, aims and
the health-care organization. In PHC, the target population for population
health management is often identified as the catchment area. It can vary
from a comprehensive registration of all inhabitants in one or more general
practices to geographical lists of communities through municipalities or
people enrolled with the health insurer (28). The target population can also
be defined as a discrete subpopulation of individuals with specific
characteristics or care needs within one or several PHC practices. The
members of a discrete population can be known with some certainty.
Examples are all people registered with a specific condition or multiple
conditions in a certain age category. For example, everyone with type 2
diabetes or all people older than 60 years with at least one
noncommunicable disease registered and with five or more medication
prescriptions (29).
For PHC to engage in population health management, PHC organizations
must ideally be formally responsible for a stable, clearly identified and
registered population they work with and follow over time. Through this,
PHC organizations are made accountable for population outcomes along
with individual outcomes and for providing care over time not only to those
who seek it but also to those who require proactive outreach. This is a basic
incentive to proactively identify hard-to-reach individuals and those with
poor health care–seeking behaviour and offer them appropriate care even
before they develop illness or its complications. A defined registered
population enables better continuity of care and also enables capitation as
a purchasing model (alone or as part of a mixed model) and moving towards
strategic purchasing (30).
8

=== PÁGINA 19 ===
2 Health assessment and population segmentation
Next, the health needs and their distribution in the identified population
have to be thoroughly analysed. This comprises two complementary
processes: needs assessment and population segmentation.
The purpose of population health assessment is to gather the information
required to understand the differences within that population, the type of
needs and the services required to improve the health of the population
with maximum impact (31). Ideally, needs should be assessed and updated
for the entire defined population (PHC catchment population or the
practice’s or PHC centre’s lists, neighbourhood, town or city). It involves
assessing the health needs, including how they are distributed
(geographically, by age group, socioeconomic status, occupation and other),
describing the current patterns of use and level of services provided and
identifying the extent of the gap between need and supply and the possible
causes, including barriers to access. For instance, data can come from
medical records, referrals, retrospective claims, disease registries or health
surveys or questionnaires. When larger population groups are considered,
other sources can be used such as population databases and registries,
health care utilization, prescriptions or dedicated surveys (18).
Different approaches for gathering and analysing information about the
needs of the population are combined.
• Epidemiological approaches: based mainly on quantitative data to
estimate the size, composition and characteristics of the population of
interest, including information on the geographical distribution, on trends
over time and by key population subgroups. Civil registration and vital
statistics systems and health information systems are good sources of
data (32). The level of need is indicated by the prevalence of disease,
disability or adverse life circumstances and the current provision of
services to meet these situations. Comparing data between geographical
settings, socioeconomic groups or across time can identify various needs,
including relative insufficient or excessive health-care provision based on
morbidity, service availability, visits to or by health-care professionals,
quality of care, medication prescribed or specialist referrals (33).
• Patient and community engagement approaches provide first-hand
qualitative information to understand which population groups could be
better served with more tailored health and care services. Needs are
usually related to social determinants of health and how they are
experienced by patients, more than purely biomedical aspects. For
instance, self-reported biological, mental, functional and social domain
inputs have been used in the Netherlands for population segmentation
and demonstrated their predictive ability of the segments for health-care
utilization (34). Involving local organizations such as nongovernmental
organizations or voluntary groups can help to access information that
may otherwise not be registered in official registries or databases
(country example 2). Patient-reported outcome measures are tools for
capturing the patient’s perspectives on the outcomes of their own
treatment and care (35). Depending on the target, patient-reported
outcome measures can be generic, disease-specific or condition-specific.
Patient-reported outcome measures can help patients and clinicians to
make better decisions, but they can also enable comparisons of providers’
performances to stimulate improvements in services (36).
9

=== PÁGINA 20 ===
Based on the assessment of needs, the goal of population segmentation is
to group individuals in relatively homogeneous groups (segments) (31),
depending on the type of care needed and how often they will need it (37).
In current daily practice, segmentation is often based on the general
characteristics of the population. The best way is to start with the
information easily available and then gather more information as it is
needed, gradually building up a richer and more complete picture. The
simplest segmentation is based on single variables only such as frailty,
physical functioning, pattern of health-care utilization, health-related
quality of life or need for a specific health-care service. More complex
population segmentation can include more information combining different
data in a composite index to improve understanding of the health needs,
such as the Charlson index, the Cumulative Index Illness Rating Scale or the
Duke Severity of Illness Checklist (38,39).
Examples of patient segments have been identified in several studies
ranging from simpler to advanced divisions. They include:
• “young, healthy”; “middle age, healthy”; “stable, chronic disease”;
“complicated chronic disease”; and “frequent admitters” (40);
• “robust seniors without chronic conditions”; “seniors with one or more
chronic conditions”; “seniors with advanced illness and end-organ failure”;
and “seniors with advanced frailty or at the end of life” (41); and
• “frequent attenders in primary care”; “patients receiving home care
support by the primary care team, emergency services or teams
specialized in geriatric and palliative care”; “patients receiving social
support visits”; and “patients receiving polypharmacy” (42).
Segmentation can also be based on specific populations with certain
diseases or conditions, such as mental health, cancer, respiratory,
cardiovascular and gastrointestinal conditions (31). The more concrete and
targeted a segmentation process is, the more services can be tailored and
the greater the impact.
For instance, in England, the National Association of Primary Care (43) has
developed a framework to help segment their population into manageable
groups and design personalized services around them (Fig. 3). It tracks three
dimensions: stage of life, holistic health and care needs (generally well,
long-term conditions and complex health needs) and type of needs
(prevention, routine or ongoing and urgent care needs).
Fig. 3. The National Prevention needs
Routine and ongoing needs
Association of Primary
Urgent care needs
Care cube framework
Children and
young people
Working-age adults
Older people
Complex needs
Long-term conditions
and long-term needs
Generally well
10

=== PÁGINA 21 ===
Box 1. Population
segmentation in health Dispensarization refers to one of the world’s first preventive medicine
systems with a systems introduced in the USSR in the 1970s, consisting of massive
dispensarization heritage health check-up programmes followed by follow-up for the whole
population. It was introduced through a stepwise approach, starting
with children and the economically active population to cover, from
the early 1980s, the whole population.
The scope and frequency of the check-ups for healthy people was
defined by employment categories, but it was often once per year at a
minimum. Once the massive population check-ups had been
performed, the population was classified into four main broad groups:
(1) healthy people with no known risk factors; (2) people with one or
more risk factors for noncommunicable diseases but without chronic
conditions; (3) people with one or more chronic conditions (such as
hypertension, asthma or diabetes) or, later, moderate to severe acute
illness (such as pneumonia) and reproductive, maternal, newborn and
child health, including people with multimorbidity but diseases often
being reported separately in the corresponding dispensarization book;
for instance, a person with hypertension and diabetes would be
included in the two books; and (4) people with severe disability. Then,
based on the disease and its severity, and often on employment
status, a number of visits and tests were planned usually for a one-
year period.
This system can be viewed as one of the first segmentation
approaches implemented and a good starting-point to move to a
more mature PHC approach since it entailed:
• moving the focus of PHC from just individuals seeking care towards
the community, with district internists and district paediatricians
receiving more responsibilities for following up everyone in the
catchment areas and not only those who seek care;
• classifying the population into groups based on their health
conditions and offering protocolized care accordingly, which can be
considered a predecessor of more advanced population
segmentation processes;
• adopting a standardized system for following up patients that
contributed to moving from sporadic contacts to planned and regular
visits with health-care providers; and
• expanding the focus towards a more comprehensive range of health
issues, including reproductive, maternal, newborn and child health
and a wide range of noncommunicable diseases, which contributed
to questioning the ability of internal medicine specialists (the first
points of contact for the population in PHC clinics) to meet the new
priorities and, consequently, whether PHC physicians needed to
obtain a more comprehensive range of clinical knowledge, triggering
thinking about the relevance of family medicine.
Despite country-specific differences based on their service delivery
model, level of digitalization, governance arrangements, priority
given to noncommunicable diseases and other health system factors,
several countries in the WHO European Region still preserve some
forms of dispensarization (44–47 ). Although some of its features
provide a good starting-point for communities to get PHC services
11

=== PÁGINA 22 ===
Box 1. (continued)
more proactively, countries are progressively introducing reforms to
overcome some of its limitations and make it fit for purpose for a
modern health system built around a PHC approach. These are not
limited to countries with a Semashko model heritage and include:
dominance of a disease-oriented, biomedical approach; lack of more
holistic assessment of individual and community needs; lack of
attention to social determinants of health; lack of focus on individual
and population outcomes and giving priority to inputs (visits and
diagnostic tests) and reporting criteria; excessive reliance on narrow
specialists to manage people with uncomplicated noncommunicable
diseases such as hypertension or type 2 diabetes; vertical
relationships between doctors, nurses and patients (and communities),
which diminished the patient’s role and responsibilities to care for
their own health; or low uptake and insufficient evaluation.
Country examples 5 and 10 include examples from countries with a
Semashko heritage (Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan) that are moving from
biomedical towards more holistic assessment of needs and social
determinants through population health management approaches.
Country example 2: Institutionalizing community engagement for health needs
LITHUANIA assessment and priority setting at the local level
Lithuania decentralized health system governance by giving
municipalities a greater role and responsibility in PHC governance and
local public health policies. In a hospital-centred system, equipping
municipal administrations with formal mechanisms to shift policy
priorities from treatment towards addressing upstream causes of
diseases and social determinants of health was very important. To
achieve this, the circle of decision-makers was expanded beyond
health service managers by engaging with other relevant actors at the
local level.
Community health boards were established in the late 1990s in all 60
municipalities in Lithuania as a formal governance structure that
brings together municipal politicians (such as the mayor or deputy
mayor), representatives of municipal institutions (such as the
municipal chief physician and representatives from social care
institutions, PHC centres, public health bureaus, hospitals, schools,
kindergartens and youth centres) and nongovernmental organizations
and community organizations (such as patient organizations) working
in health. The aim was to engage all these parties in health needs
assessment and priority-setting processes and enable them to provide
advice to municipal councils on implementing health promotion and
disease prevention activities. Community health boards are advisory
boards under municipal councils, which are responsible for approving
their regulation and financing their activities.
Community health boards use an inclusive and participatory approach
to develop four-year health action programmes that set strategic
goals based on the contextual needs of municipalities that shape
municipal public health policy. They have a major role in advocating for
action to improve health and well-being by connecting the priorities
expressed by communities with the priorities obtained by monitoring
health data and indicators. Community health board activities
12

=== PÁGINA 23 ===
generally include (1) health needs assessment through meetings with
communities, public health specialists, health service representatives
and municipal institutions from different sectors; (2) defining priorities
for multisectoral community health intervention projects; (3) providing
advice on implementing preventive programmes such as on
noncommunicable diseases or tuberculosis; (4) announcing calls for
health projects, assessing those submitted and making proposals to
the municipal council for funding selected ones; (5) monitoring the
implementation of the community projects and contributing to
disseminating their results; and (6) disseminating good practices for
improving health at the local level within and across municipalities.
For instance, in the Municipality of Klaipeda, after the Public Health
Bureau presented the children’s health profile, the community health
board organized a round of discussions with stakeholders, and the
Municipality funded a project proposed by the community health
board on creating and supporting the network of healthy schools. In
2022, 68% of the children in Klaipeda attend a healthy school and 80%
of schools belong to the National Healthy School Network. In the
Municipality of Kaisiadoriai, the community health board, together
with representatives from the local hospital, public health bureau and
PHC centre, promoted and participated in creating a “green corridor”
for breast cancer check-up and ensured transport for women with
lower socioeconomic status living in rural areas to health facilities,
improving their access to preventive programmes.
Over the years, community health boards have proved their role as
advocates for promoting health, preventing disease and improving
health and well-being in alignment with the priority health needs
expressed by communities. They have contributed to shifting the
dominance in health needs assessment and priority-setting processes
from hospital specialists to PHC professionals in the first place and
progressively to greater involvement and leadership of representatives
from other sectors, including social care and education. This enabled
the scope of policy priorities to be widened from just treating diseases
towards addressing the upstream causes of disease. In the
Municipality of Klaipėda, this along with further public health action
and PHC strengthening contributed to (1) reducing the number of
hospitals beds per 10 000 population from 17.8 in 2007 to 7.2 in 2019
(48); and (2) reducing avoidable mortality by 45% (from 421 per
100 000 population in 2007 to 231 in 2021) (49).
Country example 3: Person-centred segmentation to improve care for older people
NETHERLANDS In 25 diverse health-care and welfare organizations and associations
of older people in the Netherlands (50 ), a population segmentation
approach based on people’s experienced difficulties in fulfilling their
needs was adopted to provide efficient, demand-driven care to older
people. The programme was initiated through a grant from the
national research council, the academic hospital and the department
for older people in combination with the PHC department. The
programme is being extended to all northern provinces in the
Netherlands.
Data were collected on the difficulties in biopsychosocial functioning,
and older adults were categorized into five segments: feeling vital;
13

=== PÁGINA 24 ===
difficulties with psychosocial coping; physical and mobility complaints; 3
difficulties experienced in multiple domains; and feeling extremely
frail. The segmentation was carried out by a team of data analysts at
the university and was made available to the health-care professionals
on a three-month basis on paper. At a later stage, this was built in
within the electronic medical record, so the process was fully
digitalized.
The segmentation improved the targeting of the interventions
delivered not only by general practitioners or nurses but also by
physiotherapists, psychologists and social care services. This
segmentation process provides PHC and other health-care providers
the option to perform a more comprehensive first triage step than only
a disease-based (biomedical) one. It offers a starting-point for
providing more person-centred care and to focus more predominantly
on unfulfilled needs instead of symptoms and diseases. For example,
the segmentation showed that the segment “difficulties with
psychosocial coping” was relatively large and included individuals
about whom the general practitioner did not know that they
experienced psychosocial difficulties. As a result, a specialized nurse in
mental health started visiting these older adults at their homes.
Country example 4: The Kaiser Permanente segmentation approach
UNITED STATES OF Kaiser Permanente is one of the largest non-profit health maintenance
AMERICA organizations in the United States, with more than 12.6 million
members in eight regions of the country. Kaiser Permanente’s
integrated care model is based on segmenting and stratifying the
population and supplying different types of services according to
needs.
The Senior Segmentation Algorithm developed by Kaiser Permanente
for older people identifies older adults in four care groups with similar
needs, trajectories and utilization patterns (“robust seniors without
chronic conditions”, “seniors with one or more chronic conditions”,
“seniors with advanced illness and end-organ failure” and “seniors with
advanced frailty or at the end of life”). The core components of the
Kaiser Permanente model emphasize disease prevention, self-
management support, disease management and case management
for members with multiple conditions. PHC professionals work
alongside other specialist and health-care providers to deliver
integrated care (51).
It is being implemented in all Kaiser Permanente regions, with the goal
of determining the key elements of care for members in each group.
The algorithm requires multiple sources of data, such as clinical data
from the electronic health record and encounter diagnosis, the use of
home oxygen and home hospital beds, surgeries and procedures,
severe organ failure and hospice or palliative care orders (41). The
segment assignment is included in the patient’s electronic health
record and prompts doctors to take certain actions that are tailored to
the segment’s specific needs. Based on these data, it offers a range of
interventions tailored to the needs of different individuals and
population groups to support people to remain healthy and to deliver
the right treatments when they become ill.
14

=== PÁGINA 25 ===
3 Risk stratification and impactibility
Risk stratification is an intentional, planned and proactive process that
predicts the probability of adverse events occurring and assigns an
individual a risk status or score. Based on individual risk assessment,
patients are typically classified into high-, medium- (rising-) and low-risk
groups. Risk levels should correspond to the likelihood that patients
experience negative health outcomes and/or higher rates of unnecessary or
preventable health care utilization (52). This allows targeting effective
interventions to prevent them and promotes resource utilization based on
individual and population needs rather than demand (43,53).
Risk stratification is essential for PHC practices to be proactive and reach
out to individuals based on their risk profile even if they do not present to
Risk PHC facilities and to tailor PHC service delivery accordingly. As described in
stratification is the examples below, even if risk stratification (especially as it becomes more
essential for PHC sophisticated) is not done at the PHC level, the results can be made
practices to be proactive available to PHC professionals, often through integrated electronic health
and reach out to individuals record systems, so they can benefit from it in their daily practice.
based on their risk profile even
if they do not present to PHC Risk stratification may be carried out in PHC settings with varying degrees
facilities and to tailor PHC of complexity depending on local resources and with different purposes
service delivery depending on the context. In many cases, countries’ first engagement in risk
accordingly. stratification in PHC is with a single risk for specific diseases, such as
cardiovascular disease, diabetes or renal failure (see Box 2). These tools can
estimate the risk of morbidity, severity, pain, discomfort, dysfunction or
mortality (54). Some of the risk stratification tools use simple paper-based
algorithms; others are supported by software applications. Data sources
range from data from paper registers in single practices to those from
integrated electronic health record systems at the regional or national level.
Box 2. Basic risk
PHC professionals can use relatively simple tools for estimating the
stratification
total risk of cardiovascular disease and thus enhance cardiovascular
disease management. This is often countries’ first engagement in risk
stratification.
The European Society of Cardiology has developed, derived, calibrated
and validated a new algorithm to predict the 10-year fatal and non-
fatal risk of first-onset cardiovascular disease in European populations
based on age, sex, smoking status, history of diabetes, systolic blood
pressure and total and HDL cholesterol) (55). The WHO package of
essential noncommunicable disease (PEN) interventions for PHC
protocol also offers a cardiovascular disease risk table requiring data
such as age, sex, current smoking status, presence or absence of
diabetes, systolic blood pressure and total cholesterol (56). Both
recommend counselling or treating according to risk level, following
the WHO HEARTS technical package, including behavioural risk
interventions (focused on diet, physical activity, tobacco cessation
and avoiding harmful use of alcohol); drug treatment; and advice for
follow-up (frequency of visits) (57). Another example is the Finnish
Diabetes Risk Score (58), the most recommended risk-screening tool
that has proved to reliably predict future and prevalent undiagnosed
diabetes in European and other populations.
15

=== PÁGINA 26 ===
Box 2. (continued)
For multimorbidity risk assessment in PHC, the Charlson index is
frequently used. It was initially developed among hospitalized
patients but is now adapted to PHC. It estimates mortality prognosis
based on age and the fixed weights of 20 specific disorders, including
cerebrovascular disease, myocardial infarction, skin ulcers or cellulitis,
congestive heart failure, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or
asthma, diabetes, dementia or depression (59).
There are also validated scales that can be used in paper format to
stratify social risks such as the Escala de Gijón used for evaluating the
social situation of older people in Spain. It assesses five items (family
situation, economic situation, housing, relationships and social
support), providing an overall score that can be used to complement
clinical risk and enhance clinical decision-making and tailored care (60).
As health system maturity increases, countries can move towards more
sophisticated risk stratification approaches that use large population
databases that combine data from different sources and perform statistical
clustering and predictive modelling methods (see Box 3). These sophisticated
risk stratification approaches require mature health information systems,
ability to link and combine data from different databases and strong analytical
capacity or analytical systems, which is a future perspective for many systems.
Box 3. Comprehensive
automated risk Automated stratification approaches can efficiently stratify large
stratification tools patient panels. A recent EU- funded study identified and assessed 48
models for risk stratification using 14 performance metrics (61). The
most known advanced analytical tools are the Johns Hopkins Adjusted
Clinical Groups system (62–64), used in EU regions in Italy or Spain or
in the United Kingdom, the 3M Clinical Risk Groups (65,66) used in
many health-care organizations in the United States or the adjusted
morbidity groups (42) used in most regions of Spain. All use
information from multiple sources comprising demographics,
diagnosis, hospitalization, primary care visits, outpatient visits to
specialists, emergency department visits, skilled nursing facilities,
home hospitalization, palliative care and the mental health services,
drug prescriptions, medical transportation, rehabilitation or others.
These tools consider multimorbidity (which shows well-established
associations with both high use of health-care resources and poor
patient prognosis) and can be progressively fine-tuned, for instance,
by including data on social complexity, which enriches their predictive
capacity and equity sensitivity since individuals with similar clinical
risk can evolve very differently, and have different needs, based on
social factors such as family situation, socioeconomic status, housing
conditions and quality of social networks (67). In selecting tools,
several criteria should be considered, including the availability of the
required technical (analytical) skills and the time and resources
required to integrate them into existing information technology
systems, including the electronic health record (52). Other
considerations are licensing constraints; whether computational
algorithms are open source; and whether the adjusted morbidity
groups rely mostly on statistical criteria or include expert-based
coefficients that make transferability more difficult (68).
16

=== PÁGINA 27 ===
Box 3. (continued)
The bias and shortcomings that can be found in some risk scores
should also be considered. For example, age bias (favouring older
people); giving priority to diseases that generate the most health-care
use; or racial bias (for example, Black patients assigned the same level
of risk by the algorithm being sicker than White patients) (69,70).
A key feature is that the organization deciding the selection and use
of these tools (health ministry at the national or regional level, insurer
funds or health boards) should aim to have the confidence of the
clinical, analytical, managerial and patient communities. The periodical
update of the risk stratification solutions is required by monitoring
estimated and actual outcomes in the population, demographic
trends, prevailing public health issues or the health-care system (71).
Risk stratification requires not only identifying at-risk individuals or patients
but also determining how likely they are to respond (be affected) by various
actions or treatment options. This process is known as impactibility. Groups
or patients identified are to be amenable, impactable or care sensitive to
preventive care (27). Impactibility has two dimensions. First, at-risk
individuals, groups or patients have to be identified and approached. The
means to reach them have to be available or deployed to avoid increasing
inequalities. They have to be willing and able to participate in dedicated
care interventions. Second, clinical and health needs have to be actionable
(preventive programmes or care interventions should be able to decrease
their risks and/or mitigate their needs (72).
There are several methods for identifying those who are most likely to
benefit. These include identifying those:
• with a condition known to benefit from preventive care, such as an
ambulatory care–sensitive condition such as hospital admissions for
asthma) (73);
• with a gap between the care they are currently receiving and the care that
is evidence-informed best practice for their condition(s); for example,
inadequate PHC treatment or adherence to care may enhance the long-
term complications of diabetes such as renal, eye, nervous system and
circulatory disorders;
• with a rising risk score, who are likely to have a higher risk of an adverse
event within a specified time scale;
• whose health outcomes are worse or utilization is different than expected
for their diagnosed condition, such as visits by people with chronic
The obstructive pulmonary disease to emergency rooms resulting from
potential of risk inappropriate ambulatory care;
stratification tools • with high-impactable moments, such as newly diagnosed, recent discharge
increases substantially from hospital, recent cancer scare in which they presented with a symptom
with the ability to account that may have been suggested to be cancer but tests were negative;
for multimorbidity and social • who are likely to engage with behaviour change to improve health care,
complexity and to link the such as those with a high score on patient activation measures; and
stratification results to • past behaviour – a measure of receptivity to indicate how cohorts might
the individual level. respond to future interventions based on previous behaviour.
In summary, the potential of risk stratification tools increases substantially
with (1) the ability to account for multimorbidity and social complexity and
17

=== PÁGINA 28 ===
(2) the ability to link the stratification results to the individual level. The
former requires the capacity to link data sets across the health system (PHC,
secondary care, mental health services and public health) and outside it
(social services and local authorities). The latter requires assigning a risk
score to every patient, as opposed to aggregate data at local or catchment
area levels and making it available to PHC professionals. Moreover, the
identification of high-risk patients most likely to benefit from different
interventions and/or participation in care management programmes should
be facilitated by a combination of predictive modelling (risk stratification)
and selection by PHC physicians (74).
Country example 5: Strengthening PHC proactivity through cardiovascular disease risk
UZBEKISTAN stratification and the universal progressive patronage model
In 2018, Uzbekistan embarked on a comprehensive health reform
aiming at transforming its health system into a modern, high-
performing system. Landmark legislation was approved in 2020,
providing the basis for transforming the health system in the areas of
service delivery, health financing and health information systems. The
package mandated a stepwise approach for the countrywide roll-out
of the new system, starting with Syrdarya Oblast in 2021.
One key reform pillar is strengthening PHC to improve the quality of
and equal access to health-care services by introducing a team-based,
community-oriented PHC model with greater attention to health
promotion and disease prevention. Newly established PHC teams
generally comprise one family doctor; one practice nurse and two
patronage nurses with expanded roles; and one midwife, who is shared
between two or three teams. Teams work within a defined catchment
area and are responsible for an average of 2000 population and have
been formally linked with the makhallas (community organization)
that operate in their catchment area.
Practising nurses have started to perform pre-doctoral check-ups and
triage in separate rooms and have obtained more responsibilities in
noncommunicable disease management. They especially focus on
individual risk stratification for adults older than 40 years through
paper-based WHO PEN and HEARTS protocols. Based on the
cardiovascular disease risk groups, practising nurses plan follow-up
visits together with patronage nurses. Patronage nurses have taken on
new responsibilities for noncommunicable diseases and are now
responsible for home visits to people with chronic diseases. They
contribute to following up these patients more closely and ensure that
they attend the follow-up appointment with family doctors or practice
nurses. They act as the link between PHC teams and the community
through their joint work with makhallas. Patronage nurses also deploy
now a more systematic approach to assessing and addressing the
needs of families with pregnant women and children by applying the
universal progressive patronage model, which includes two
components: universal, that covers every family with pregnant women,
women in the postpartum period and children younger than five years
and defines a set frequency of visits; and targeted, or families
identified as being at risk, which includes the development of a family
eco-map prepared by the PHC team with tailored recommendations to
reduce and/or remove the risk.
18

=== PÁGINA 29 ===
The systematic implementation of PEN and HEARTS (56,57) protocols
for individual cardiovascular disease stratification along with the
universal progressive patronage model is helping PHC teams in
Syrdarya to plan their work, schedule follow-up visits and distribute
responsibilities among team members and can be the basis for more
advanced population risk stratification in the future. Along with the
establishment of clear catchment areas, this has contributed to
increasing the proactivity of PHC teams, shifting the responsibility of
PHC providers from the patients who emphasize their needs to all the
population for which they are formally responsible. However, despite
these good features, further work is needed to improve the focus on
tailoring protocols to the individual needs of patients to effectively
improve patient outcomes.
Country example 6: Considering multimorbidity and social complexity for risk
SPAIN stratification
The adjusted morbidity groups were developed by the Catalan Health
Service and implemented, under the leadership of Spain’s Ministry of
Health, in most regions of Spain to stratify their population (more than
38 million people) (42,75,76). They use information from hospitalization,
primary care visits, emergency department visits, skilled nursing
facilities, palliative care, mental health services and pharmacy
prescription and expenditure to classify the population into several
mutually exclusive morbidity groups, which are further divided into five
degrees of severity. The adjusted morbidity groups also enable the
population to be stratified, assigning a single value or risk score to each
individual. Importantly, clinical complexity is not assessed solely based
on age or individual diseases but on their interaction.
In the region of Catalonia, with a population exceeding 7.6 million, the
adjusted morbidity groups are used to include individuals in
programmes for patients with complex chronic conditions or for
patients with advanced chronic conditions (77). The adjusted morbidity
group stratification results appear in the clinical work station used by
primary care professionals, who receive a risk score for each patient
(78). They can then draw up a list of their most complex patients by
combining the information provided by the adjusted morbidity groups
with other clinical variables, which enhances the provision of proactive
care and the management of high-risk patients. The adjusted morbidity
groups complexity index is also used in other regions of Spain to set
priorities for individuals for eligibility for influenza vaccination and
COVID-19 vaccination and for alerting them by text messages to make
sure they present to the PHC clinic. Besides clinical management,
adjusted morbidity groups are also used for equity-sensitive health
workforce planning and resource allocation in PHC (76).
The Agency for Health Quality and Assessment of Catalonia developed
a socioeconomic index to measure deprivation at the level of PHC
catchment areas. The index is the result of combining information on
the percentage of blue-collar workers; the percentage of population
with basic education; the percentage of the population that is
unemployed; the percentage of the population born in low- and
middle-income countries; older people living alone; and socioeconomic
status. The index is integrated with information provided with the
adjusted morbidity groups and is used to adjust resource allocation for
19

=== PÁGINA 30 ===
each PHC team based on the socioeconomic level of its served 4
population. PHC teams can use the additional funding to reinforce the
services provided to deprived populations and to provide additional
services. This supports the social work dimension in PHC and can
inform community health action (79).
Country example 7: Reaching out to vulnerable people through risk stratification during
ENGLAND, the COVID-19 pandemic
UNITED KINGDOM In a health-care system in southwestern England (Bristol, North
Somerset and South Gloucestershire) comprising about 1 million
individuals from 78 general practices, a population health
management approach was followed to identify and characterize
individuals at high risk of severe COVID-19. The purpose was to
manage their health needs and mitigate potential shielding-induced
harm (80).
Individual-level information, including current chronic conditions,
historical health-care utilization and demographic and socioeconomic
data, was used for descriptive analysis of this group using population
health management methods. A system-wide data set was created at
the integrated care system through the collaboration between all
partners within the system with its own digital and data team
(including analysts). The data set consisted of two tables – attributes
and activity. The first table contained information about patient
characteristics, such as demographic information (age and sex),
clinical information (long-term conditions), socioeconomic information
(deprivation index) and other data such as smoking status and social
status. These data were principally derived from general practitioners’
patient administration systems. The second table contains information
regarding patient contacts such as point of delivery (such as
secondary care, inpatient or elective), specialty (such as dermatology),
provider, dates, times and cost (81).
Geospatial analysis revealed that 3.3% of rural and semirural residents
were in the high-risk group versus 2.91% of urban and inner-city
residents (P < 0.001); 29 798 individuals (2.94%) were identified as high
risk, 32.79% as moderate risk and the remaining 67.01% as low
(baseline) risk. Segmentation uncovered six distinct clusters
comprising the high-risk population, with key differentiation based on
age and the presence of cancer, respiratory and mental health
conditions. The distinct characteristics of types of individuals in each
cluster enabled a more tailored response from health and care
providers and policy-makers. These include regular contact with them
and connecting them to a safety net of health and social care
resources coordinated by PHC networks. In a later stage, it supported
vaccination uptake among the at-risk groups, with a focus on equity.
20

=== PÁGINA 31 ===
4 Tailored service delivery
The next step is defining the interventions or care programmes to fill the care
gaps proactively, tailoring them to each of the different groups or risk strata
(Fig. 3) and to individuals. By enabling a risk-informed and equity-sensitive
service design, population health management helps to ensure that available
resources are used to maximize benefit, delivering better value.
Population health management interventions span the entire continuum of
care, from promoting healthy living or disease prevention activities to
programmes to manage high-risk patients with multimorbidity. Different
levels of need or risk require different approaches to care (self-management
By enabling through education programmes and other resources, disease management
a risk-informed and or case management) with a different balance between self-care and
equity-sensitive service professional care required (Fig. 4). The dotted red line in Fig. 4 shows the
design, population health different balance between self-care and professional care in the different
management helps to strata of the pyramid. Prevention services can include clinical preventive
ensure that available services, such as immunizations, screening, health education, mother and
resources are used to child care, counselling and education; or community preventive services,
maximize benefit, such as fluoridation or lead testing.
delivering better
value. In considering the segments or risk groups, the aim is to deploy structured
integrated care programmes, organizing services to target the group’s needs.
Addressing each individual’s clinical and care needs requires combining the
segmentation or risk stratification provided by the tools used with the
functional status (mobility, strength and cognitive status) and the clinical
Fig. 4. Type of services information (42). In dealing with the risk of an individual patient, the aim is to
and balance between define a personalized intervention or care plan to support his or her specific
self-care and professional needs and priorities. It has to be ensured that there are no conflicting goals
care according to risk and treatment plans for individual patients. For example, in the group of
strata, adapted from advanced frailty or at the end of life, aggressive efforts to reach target goals
Kaiser Pyramid (51) for specific chronic diseases are potentially counterproductive (41).
Self-care Professional care Focus of care
Patients with Case
complex needs 5% management
High-risk Disease
15%
patients with management
chronic diseases
Self-management
Patients with support, follow-up
chronic diseases 70–80% and preventing
disease progression
Health promotion
General
20–30% and disease
population
prevention
21

=== PÁGINA 32 ===
Interventions resulting from population health management approaches are
not necessarily an add-on to existing services but can be an alternative
solution to improve the existing approach and deliver services more
efficiently. This often involves redesigning existing care pathways and
workflows to ensure better integration between teams or levels of care;
changing the roles and/or composition of PHC teams (such as reinforcing
the preventive skills of nurses or adding social workers, psychologists or
pharmacists); or looking for actors active in the community to partner with
(such as nongovernmental organizations providing mental health services or
sexual and reproductive health education). For example, empowering people
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease at home within their own social
context to better maintain their health can be a joint exercise between PHC,
public health specialists, secondary clinicians, the voluntary sector (in the
form of smoking-secession charities for example) and patient communities
themselves (in the form of local peer support groups). Each of these services
may already exist, but the population health management approach enables
an identified cohort of patients who would most benefit from an integrated
approach to be identified and jointly supported by these networks, working
in a collaborative manner. It supplies a clear patient group for which these
disparate teams collaborate and thereby leads to turning the somewhat
nebulous concepts of collaboration and integrated working into reality.
Population health management interventions should clearly focus on
addressing the social determinants of health. Effective population health
A search improvement requires attention to social and environmental determinants
for determinants of health as well as health care (8). This is especially true since health-care
and underlying systems determine only 10% of health outcomes, whereas health behaviour
mechanisms of the and social and physical settings determine at least 50% (7). Changing health
unfulfilled need or care behaviour and social and physical settings requires activities beyond the
gap is needed across the clinical setting that incorporate community and public health systems (82).
population health A search for determinants and underlying mechanisms of the unfulfilled
management need or care gap is needed across the population health management cycle.
cycle. PHC providers, who are deeply rooted in the communities they work, are in a
unique position to ensure this.
Addressing the social determinants of health requires strengthening the
community orientation of PHC providers and, as part of this, engaging with
community-based partners operating in their catchment areas (83).
Population health management can support community health by providing
actionable quantitative information on the social determinants of health. In
addition, community health processes can strengthen risk stratification and
segmentation processes through first-hand qualitative information from
individuals and communities. This is true for the three levels of community
health:
• individual and family level: a biopsychosocial approach and
recommendation of assets for health and community resources;
• group level: education for health focusing on social determinants; and
• intersectoral collective level: community action on health (84).
PHC is in a privileged position to partner with community-based assets that
may be better equipped to address behavioural, commercial, social and
environmental determinants of health (83). This requires PHC providers to
have a good overview of the community organizations functioning in their
22

=== PÁGINA 33 ===
catchment area so they can contribute to addressing gaps in coverage and
supporting the well-being of communities, families and individuals.
Over time, a population health management approach can bring about
cultural change, and teams in different places within and outside the health
system can start working together. The aim is to reach out to populations
most in need, coordinate services to avoid duplication and maximize niche
skills, ensuring smooth transitions across programmes and information
sharing (85). This can be facilitated by factors such as professionals from
different teams getting to know and trust each other. The result can be
integrated organizational development, based on a method that starts with
data and analytics and evolves into an approach based on collaboration and
trust.
Box 4. Social prescribing:
enhancing coordination Social prescribing, also known as health asset recommendation, is a
between PHC and means of connecting patients to a range of non-clinical services in the
community resources for community to improve their health and well-being (86). It builds on
improving health and the evidence that addressing social determinants of health such as
well-being socioeconomic status, social inclusion, housing and education is key to
improving health outcomes (86). Activities offered may include sports,
cookery, weight management, befriending, volunteering, gardening,
arts activities and welfare advice programmes related to employment,
housing or financial advice, depending on patients’ needs and local
availability (87). The three main actors usually involved in providing
social prescribing services play differentiated (although
complementary and often overlapping) roles.
PHC teams
PHC professionals often initiate the referral when they identify well-
being needs that can potentially be addressed or supported by wider
community-based services. Exploring and obtaining understanding of
patients’ wider concerns (beyond the specific reason for consultation)
are critical to initiating referral. Mapping local community health
assets is central to social prescribing initiatives. For example, the
initiative promoted by the community health strategy in Aragón, Spain
(88) included the inventory (or map) of community assets (whose
willingness to participate in the programme was previously validated
by public health services) in the electronic health record. This
contributes to facilitating the referral process during routine
consultations and enables social prescribing activities to be registered
and analysed.
Community-based organizations
Community-based activities are typically provided by voluntary and
community sector organizations but may also be delivered by local
authorities (such as libraries and sports centres) or the health system
(such as health coaches, patient support groups organized within PHC
practices). Although community-based organizations are involved in
practically all social prescribing arrangements, their role varies across
programmes. They are often considered mere service providers or the
destination of referral pathways instead of active partners and co-
producers. As a result, their experiences and challenges are rarely
studied and remain poorly understood.
23

=== PÁGINA 34 ===
Box 4. (continued)
Community connectors (or social prescribers)
The connection between PHC and community resources is essential to
many social prescribing models and is often (though not always)
facilitated through dedicated staff members. Some countries have
created specific social prescribing roles with different names, such as
link workers in the United Kingdom (89) or well-being coaches in the
Netherlands (90). Others have repurposed existing health-care
personnel, such as social workers in Portugal (91) or nurses and allied
health workers in Germany (92), or encouraged joint PHC team
involvement, such as by relying on and upskilling existing
multiprofessional teams in Spain (93). Social prescribers are
fundamentally knowledgeable about the local community health
assets and PHC teams involved so that they can make relevant
connections and contribute to strengthening community partnership.
Social prescribing programmes have been typically implemented in
areas of great socioeconomic need as a way of tackling health
inequalities by providing additional support to people facing an
increased social and disease burden. Social prescribing programmes
have also increasingly targeted specific patient groups based on their
medical diagnoses and/or health-care utilization. The Ways to
Wellness programme in the United Kingdom, for instance, focused on
people diagnosed with long-term conditions living in areas with high
socioeconomic deprivation (94). The Culture Vitamins initiative in
Denmark offered art activities for people with mental health
conditions (95). The Social Prescribing in Sweden programme delivered
personalized social activities for older adults reporting loneliness and
social isolation in PHC (96). The activities offered, referral mechanisms
and target groups might vary, but social prescribing schemes should
remain relevant, appropriate and accessible to the people with the
greatest health and social needs.
Country example 8: Targeted services for various high-risk patients
GERMANY Located in southwestern Germany, Gesundes Kinzigtal is one of the
few population-based integrated care approaches in Germany. It
covers all age groups and care settings for a total population
exceeding 30 000 people. The system serving about half of the
population of the region is run by a regional health management
company (Gesundes Kinzigtal GmbH) in cooperation with the
physicians’ network in the region (MQNK), a German health-care
management company (OptiMedis AG) and two statutory health
insurers (97–99). Gesundes Kinzigtal GmbH and the two health
insurers established a shared savings contract providing financial
incentives for managers and health-care providers to realize
substantial efficiency gains based on a population health
management approach.
The Gesundes Kinzigtal model groups their population into healthy
insured, low-risk, rising-risk and high-risk groups and develops
separate strategies for each group. To do so, the regional health
management company gathers insurer, hospital and provider data to
run analysis and build connections between providers to track patients
across the system. Their data warehouse includes insurer data on
24

=== PÁGINA 35 ===
claims, diagnoses, services, prescriptions and hospital admissions as
well as data from service partners. All partnering doctors can access
information stored by all other partnering providers through the
regional organization. A system-wide electronic health record ensures
that information about patients is available across providers and care
settings.
Health-care professionals target interventions for each risk group by
establishing collaborations with a wide range of community actors,
including gym and sport clubs, schools, self-health groups and local
governments. Health-care professionals have been also trained in
shared decision-making to ensure that patients are actively involved
in their own care. For the healthy insured before getting into risk
(about 35% of the total), interventions include health literacy training,
health festivals and health promotion in schools and companies and
prevention efforts aligned with various chronic care programmes
initiated in PHC. For the insured at risk (about 40%), they provide
healthy weight programmes, a blood pressure initiative, joint
development of health goals and cooperation with sports clubs. For
the group with rising risks (about 20%), they provide multispecialty
support through disease management, earlier psychotherapy visits,
self-help and self-management training for people with chronic
diseases. Finally, for the high-risk patients (about 5%), they focus on
polypharmacy issues, intensive health coaching and programmes with
doctors and nurses.
The model has led to significant gains in population health,
improvements in the experience of care and reduced per capita costs
(99). It has shown a decrease in the overuse of health services for the
prescription of anxiolytics, antibiotics for upper-respiratory tract
infections, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, non-recommended
prescriptions for vascular dementia and for Alzheimer’s disease and an
increase in the prescription of antiplatelet drugs and statins (where
appropriate) for patients with chronic coronary heart disease,
prescriptions of statins for patients with acute myocardial infarction
and cardiology referrals for patients diagnosed with heart
insufficiency. A propensity score matched control group suggests an
increase in life expectancy by 1.4 years and 10 years since the inception
of the model (99).
Country example 9: Addressing noncommunicable disease risk factors through nurse-
SLOVENIA lead, equity-sensitive proactivity
Slovenia has a longstanding tradition of providing accessible and
comprehensive PHC services. Established in 1927, Slovenian PHC
strongly emphasizes addressing health equity and reaching out to
vulnerable populations in local communities to identify environmental,
social and behaviour-related risk factors and diagnose disease in its
early stage of development (100).
Registered nurses in family medicine teams conduct regular screening
and follow-up for people with noncommunicable diseases to reduce
family doctors’ growing burden and workload. Each family medicine
practice has a list of registered patients (a capitation list), managed in
defined groups of healthy individuals; those with risk factors; and
those with the most common chronic diseases. Financial incentives are
25

=== PÁGINA 36 ===
given for meeting target values in screening check-ups. The National
Public Health Institute manages and leads the noncommunicable
disease prevention and control programme at the national level.
Screening focuses on shared metabolic and behavioural risk factors
(hypertension, high blood sugar, high blood lipids, overweight and
obesity, unhealthy diet, lack of physical activity, tobacco use, risky
alcohol use and sleep disorders) and people 30 years and older are
invited every five years for screening (101). Patients are referred to
family physicians for further diagnostic and treatment procedures if
results indicate disease, and to health promotion centres if risk factors
are present.
Health promotion centres offer evidence-informed intervention
programmes to support individuals in addressing their behavioural risk
factors with the expertise of various professionals, including nurses,
physiotherapists, psychologists, dietitians and kinesiologists, with a
proven impact on health outcomes (Fig. 5) (100). Health promotion
centres enable individuals to choose from short educational activities,
focused workshops on specific risk factors or comprehensive healthy
lifestyle support programmes (102).
Community nurses provide home visits for patients who cannot visit
PHC centres, focusing on disadvantaged and vulnerable populations.
If patients do not attend PHC centres, the community nurse is
informed and assesses the reasons, including lack of invitation,
motivation or ability or refusal to cooperate. During home visits,
Fig. 5. Integrated health patients are screened for family function, loneliness and risk of falls,
promotion centres (103) ensuring equal management of all registered patients (104).
Reproductive
preventive care; Child and youth
Quality Health promotion
child preventive prevention care
parenthood for for children and
care
healthy adolescents (and
beginnings parents)
Activities in local community and inclusion
of vulnerable groups
Dental
Preventive health promotion Health promotion Adult preventive
dental care for children and programme care (GPs)
adolescents (adults)
26

=== PÁGINA 37 ===
In the past 20 years, more than half of all adults underwent screening
for risk factors, with nearly 50 000 people attending health promotion
centre intervention classes annually. The premature mortality rate in
Slovenia has declined by 14% from 2011 to 2020, from 230 to 197 per
100 000 population (105).
Country example 10: Universal progressive home-visiting model in PHC focusing on family
KAZAKHSTAN and social determinants of health
The existing model of PHC visiting services for women and young
children in Kazakhstan was too narrowly focused on the clinical needs
of women and not sufficiently oriented towards the entire family and
their psychosocial determinants of health. As a result, it was decided
to implement a universal progressive home-visiting model aimed at
reducing morbidity and mortality risk factors from the first days of life
and for all age groups by providing two types of services: universal
(general) and progressive (targeted). The principles are family
orientation, attention to the social determinants of health, lifelong
health monitoring with a focus on disease prevention, intersectoral
cooperation and integrating PHC, social care and public health
services. The model was initially piloted in one region with extensive
technical and implementation support by the UNICEF Country Office
in Kazakhstan and implemented nationwide in 2018 under the State
Programme for Healthcare Development, becoming a central element
of PHC.
All families with young children and pregnant women are covered by
universal home visits provided by PHC nurses to assess the health,
development and well-being of children. Home-visiting nurses identify
health, social, educational and other needs and assess and monitor
the child’s physical, cognitive, psycho-emotional and social
development as well as their safety and well-being. Pregnant women
are allocated two visits, and families with children younger than three
years are allotted nine visits. Compared with traditional home visits,
the number of compulsory visits was reduced by almost threefold, but
quality requirements and more holistic assessment of the health
needs of the entire family were improved. The family’s ability to ensure
the child’s healthy development and safety is assessed through
multiple elements, including good nutrition, emotional warmth
towards the child, the mental well-being of parents, the family’s
socioeconomic status and the presence of behavioural risk factors
among family members. The local community context is also assessed,
including the availability of social, psychological, health care and other
types of support to ensure the healthy development of the child and
the absence of stigma and discrimination against the family.
If health and social risks are identified, the family is provided with an
additional progressive package of (targeted) services in accordance
with the individual family support plan. There are several criteria for
providing an extended progressive home-visiting package for
pregnant or breastfeeding women (such as imbalanced diet,
depression and smoking) for children (such as difficulties with
breastfeeding, delayed speech and stunted growth) and for parents
(such as lack of involvement in raising the children and refusal to
vaccinate the children). In such cases, the home-visiting nurse makes
additional visits that involve counselling and teaching the family the
27

=== PÁGINA 38 ===
necessary skills. If the home-visiting nurse cannot solve the problem,
other members of the PHC multidisciplinary team are involved in
developing and implementing a joint plan to solve a wide range of
problems. Multidisciplinary teams are able to address psychosocial
problems more holistically since they also have psychologists and
social workers in addition to family doctors and home-visiting nurses.
If children are in extremely vulnerable situations (abuse or other
threats to the child’s life, health and safety) and problems cannot be
solved by the health system alone, additional support is provided to
the family through intersectoral cooperation. The PHC centre where
the family is registered plays a coordinating role, initiating the review
of the case by an interdepartmental commission for providing special
social services. Such commissions operate in every region, and the
number of cases removed from high-risk status is increasing,
according to national monitoring (106).
The universal home-visiting package covers 85% of pregnant women
and 76% of young children in the country (106). Besides specific
training, nurses are also supported by standards and algorithms for
monitoring early development and case management, a
comprehensive tool for assessing children’s needs and questionnaires
on depression and identifying social risks. The model is subject to
constant evaluation and improvement. Although there is no solid
evidence yet of a reduction in mortality, regional evaluations have
revealed increased awareness of health literacy among parents,
improved satisfaction with PHC services and higher breastfeeding
levels (107). For example, in Kyzylorda Region, the number of children
receiving infant formula had halved by the end of the pilot project,
saving 83 million tenge in 2017 (108).
5 Evaluation
The final step is to monitor and evaluate the intervention implemented,
which is a core part of the population health management process (18).
Management monitoring is an ongoing process, whereas evaluation
generally is a one-off or periodic activity with time limits that helps in
understanding the impact of the intervention. Both ensure that the whole
process remains fit for purpose since they enable the system to learn and
evolve. They help to reduce variation in the quality and safety of care,
improve efficiency and reinforce the accountability of all stakeholders
involved (109).
Not all population health management interventions have proven to be
effective (110–113), and both the process and outcomes should be evaluated
to determine what is working well and what has to be improved in all steps
of the population health management cycle. More evaluation research on
health outcomes is needed to add to the existing evidence base on
population health management (114). A successful evaluation strategy
requires a clear goal and realistic outcomes in terms of what can be
improved or changed but also acceptance from key stakeholders and
commitment to learn from evaluation, effective and appropriate data
collection tools and resources and budget available (43).
28

=== PÁGINA 39 ===
The emphasis can range from validating the segmentation and predictive
tools (40,42,115) to evaluating the design, implementation, performance and
Segmentation outcomes of the services deployed to address the needs. Segmentation and
and risk risk stratification should be evaluated locally by analysing the distributions
stratification should be of various subpopulations by age, sex, race and disease and checking that
evaluated locally by the results of each model do not cause inadvertent bias (69). Depending on
analysing the distributions of the main objective, the evaluation can happen at different levels and be
various subpopulations by carried out by different actors (such as the health ministry, PHC network or
age, sex, race and disease and provider or the municipal level).
checking that the results of
each model do not cause A good evaluation approach requires that PHC leaders, health professionals
inadvertent bias. and other team members at various levels have a set of tools and
techniques to regularly plan, continually monitor, periodically measure and
review the performance of their work in terms of indicators and targets for
efficiency, effectiveness and impact. The complexity of the evaluation design
has to align with the goals, data and resources available. In population
health management, developing dashboards with indicators at the patient
level, group level and programme level is useful tools to steer the direction
of the specific interventions and overall efforts. In any case, true
collaboration between analysts, clinicians and managers is required to
define the evaluation framework, analyse the data, draw insights, reach
conclusions and refine the whole process, helping to modify or co-design
services and interventions.
Ethical and equity issues should also be considered, ensuring that bias is not
introduced in the design for identifying patients eligible for specific
interventions (116). The potential stigmatizing effect of labelling an
individual or a group of people should also be considered. Evaluation
studies should also address this possible effect. The circular or reflective
nature of the monitoring and evaluation promotes a learning system
informed by data.
Country example 11: Evaluation of risk stratification
BASQUE COUNTRY, SPAIN The Basque National Health Service (Osakidetza) covers all residents,
with a target population of 3 million. The system was hindered by
fragmentation, insufficient coordination between health-care levels
and inability to provide the continuity of care required for good
management of complex patients living with multiple chronic
conditions. Within this context, the Basque Department of Health
decided to adopt a risk stratification approach to identify and select
target groups (with a focus on complex patients) that may benefit
from specific health programmes. Consequently, the adjusted clinical
group predictive model was adopted and adjusted to the context of
the Basque Country.
The data come from Osakidetza and the Basque Department of
Health, based on previous use of health resources and demographic
and clinical variables from primary care electronic medical records and
hospital and specialist outpatient care electronic databases. A
socioeconomic score is also included based on a social deprivation
index specific to place of residence. The Predictive Index, the next
year’s predicted cost for each patient compared with the average
predicted cost per patient in the Basque Country, is used as a proxy
for health needs (117). The risk score is displayed in the electronic
health record and enables PHC professionals to identify patients and
proactively provide targeted care.
29

=== PÁGINA 40 ===
Based on the stratification results, an integrated programme based on
new professional roles, improved care coordination and an extensive
infrastructure of information and communication technologies was
implemented. As a result, 9% of hospitalizations were avoided. This
effect was not found in groups not given priority, whose probability of
hospitalization increased (118). A modified version, the CareWell
programme for identified at-risk people with multimorbidity, was
deployed in four health-care areas. Compared with a control group, in
the intervention group, the number of hospitalizations and visits to
emergency centres was reduced, and the number of PHC contacts
increased. The intervention group had more appointments with a
family doctor for both face-to-face visits (P = 0.04) and phone
contacts (P = 0.002). The number of face-to-face visits to the PHC
nurse was also higher in the intervention group (P = 0.002). Clinical
changes were also observed, such as reduced body mass index and
blood glucose levels. The main changes triggered by the
implementation of the programme were related to PHC nursing roles,
proactivity and patient empowerment. Nurses were perceived as more
alert and watchful, more closely following up the health status of the
patients. The satisfaction level was high for all stakeholders (119).
Country example 12: Population health management assessment in Kaiser Permanente
UNITED STATES OF Washington State (120)
AMERICA Kaiser Permanente of Washington State has a mission to design,
finance, and deliver high-quality health care and is committed to
providing appropriate, comprehensive and coordinated care in
collaboration with their members. This means providing the right care
in the right place at the right time and with the right outcome. Kaiser
Permanente of Washington State has developed a population health
management strategy to help achieve their quality vision, aligned with
the Triple Aim of health-care objectives: improving the patient
experience of care (including quality and satisfaction); improving the
health of populations and reducing the per capita cost of health care.
The Kaiser Permanente Population Health Program relies on annual
analysis of their member population and segmentation of the
population into targeted groups. It includes five programmes and
services that work synergistically to improve the health of their
members across the health and wellness spectrum: Clinical Quality
Improvement Program, Complex Case Management Program, Diabetes
Care Program, Health Profile and Care Transitions Program. The
Population Health Program is assessed rigorously and regularly. The
first step to developing meaningful evaluation is setting programme
goals and objectives. The Population Health Program description is
revised annually, and Kaiser Permanente of Washington State reviews
overall and individual programme goals based on the previous year’s
performance. Relevant clinical, utilization and experience measures
are qualitatively and quantitatively analysed to evaluate the efficacy
of the Population Health Program. These results are interpreted and
used to develop the coming year’s targets. During this period of
evaluation, Kaiser Permanente of Washington State considers revising,
adding or eliminating programmatic services to better meet the
member population’s health needs.
30

=== PÁGINA 41 ===
In addition, Kaiser Permanente of Washington State also assesses the
needs of their member population. The population is assessed
annually in the third and fourth quarter and uses the previous year’s
member data to assess their health and needs. At minimum, the
annual population assessment examines the characteristics and
needs, including social determinants of health. It identifies and
assesses the needs of relevant subpopulations, children and
adolescent members, members with disabilities and members with
serious and persistent mental illness. This information is then used to
make recommendations regarding the Population Health Program and
other services and functions that could better meet their needs. Kaiser
Permanente of Washington State uses the population health
assessment to identify potential gaps in care and services that do not
have a current population-based strategy and to recommend areas of
opportunity for Kaiser Permanente of Washington State to serve their
especially vulnerable members.
Kaiser Permanente of Washington State receives data on their
members’ health and health-care utilization from a variety of sources.
They use these data to further segment their population and ensure
that they have programmes in their Population Health Program that
address the needs of the smaller segments of the population. Kaiser
Permanente of Washington State completes an annual segmentation
report that enables them to segment the entire member population
into four intervention levels: preventive care needs, emerging health
risks, health safety concerns and multiple chronic conditions. Within
each intervention level, the report further segments the population by
the programmes and services (such as the Complex Case Management
Program) designed to address member care needs. Kaiser Permanente
of Washington State uses the previous year’s data from claims,
electronic medical records, health risk assessments, laboratory data,
immunization records from the Washington State database, case
management documentation systems and Emergency Department
Information Exchange to identify which populations belong to each
level of intervention. This information is stored within various systems,
and the segmentation report pulls data directly from those sources or
from the Electronic Data Warehouse of Kaiser Permanente of
Washington State. The segmentation report is completed annually in
conjunction with the population health assessment.
Kaiser Permanente models have historically extensively evaluated
their programmes, showing impact. For example, between 2002 and
2005, in northern California, Kaiser Permanente helped reduce the
prevalence of smoking among its members by 25%, compared with a
7.5% reduction across California as a whole. Among its members in
northern California, the rate of heart disease mortality decreased by
26% from 1995 to 2004, and members were 30% less likely to die from
heart disease than other people in California in 2004 (121). They have
reduced disparities for cardiac risks and diabetes markers between
black and white older people, in contrast to other health plans in the
western United States (122). Colorectal cancer screening achieved
higher screening rates than the national average. Screening rates for
Black, White, Hispanic/Latino and Asian members are in the top 10%
nationally (123).
31

=== PÁGINA 42 ===
ENABLING POPULATION HEALTH
MANAGEMENT
Although moving towards a system-wide implementation of population
health management requires several years of development work and takes
time to achieve impact, taking steps towards population health
management can promote improvements in PHC even before the full
benefits of population health management are realized. This section
describes success factors that are common to all systems trying to
implement or upgrade a population health management approach (Fig. 6).
The key success factors set out below are classified as system, organizational
and clinical factors. System-level factors are best implemented from the
national level down to local systems. They create the foundational
infrastructure and environment (digital, professional, regulatory, financial and
cultural) that enables population health management to develop successfully
locally. Organizational factors are those within local organizations providing
care that can successfully engage in population health management when
empowered by the infrastructure and environment. Clinical-level factors are
those necessary for on-the-ground teams to work with their patient
communities to transform the organization factors into a reality of innovative
new models of proactive care.
Nevertheless, some critical factors affect several or all levels and are not
only relevant to implementing population health management but to any
health system reform.
1. Time: with the day-to-day pressures, change may not happen without
time and thinking space specifically allocated to enable the key agents of
change to take the reform forward. Formal organizational development
programmes, such as the national Population Health Management
Development Programme in England, can help to formalize and fund the
time and facilitation needed – at least in some pilot areas, with the
learning spread to other areas.
2. Funding: adopting new approaches often requires providers to have
additional funding, at least at the beginning, to be able to implement
changes before health outcomes improve.
3. Learning networks of population health management leaders: this is key
for explaining population health management and its benefits for PHC,
spreading and sustaining good practices and learning from
implementation mistakes. It supports making informed decisions about
scale-up by capitalizing on practical implementation experiences at all
levels and promoting peer to peer exchange of experiences to build a
social movement and improve the overall quality of interventions.
4. A culture in which innovation is encouraged and rewarded and first
runners are appreciated: moving towards system-wide implementation
of population health management is an iterative, long process. Achieving
measurable impact on overall population health outcomes takes time.
5. Aspiration for sustainability. All new innovations introduced and
changes made should aim to lead to long–term sustainable change,
which includes a change in the organizational culture of each level
described below. Although effective implementation of the factors
described in this section should naturally lead to sustainability, the fact
32

=== PÁGINA 43 ===
that population health management should lead to a long-term
approach to improving population health rather than merely being a
series of pilot projects should be separately emphasized and understood
at each stage of the design process.
System-level factors
1. An integrated, holistic, health and well-being mindset that puts
patients and communities at the centre instead of the needs of the
various institutions working in silos: leadership for population health
management is based on collaboration, connecting people who need to
work together and a culture of integration (124). This can be influenced
from the very top of the organization if the health ministry or other key
decision-makers, depending on the context or country, take a firm
position and show leadership to influence the political atmosphere and
policy directions of other key actors (insurance funds, purchasing
agencies and professionals) while also focusing on reallocating resources,
modifying incentives and implementing regulations towards population
health management (addressed below).
2. Support of policy and regulatory agencies such as health ministries,
health insurance funds and purchasing agencies: these agencies can
support population health management by providing a population health
management framework with a shared vision and objectives and training
resources. They can also support the establishment and evaluation of
pilots and the scaling up of successful experiences and promote the
creation of professional networks of population health management
champions. They can ensure that professional regulations enable PHC
professionals to work at the higher end of their competencies and have
the time to engage in population health management approaches
(especially extending the role of nurses). They play a vital role in
promoting an optimal regulatory environment to promote data sharing
(while paying due attention to data confidentiality) and digitalization and
enhancing the adoption of population health management approaches
through the right incentives (see points below). Agencies should also
consider developing an overall strategy to ensure that investment and
needs are aligned. Insights from first movers and population health
management leaders are to be considered.
In countries
3. Information governance arrangements that promote information
with unsuited legislation,
sharing within and outside the health system: population health
the first step entails examining
management relies on data from a wide range of sources,
barriers that prevent data sharing
organizations and professionals (within and beyond the health
within the health system (between
sector). This requires a trust framework to secure the flow of
different services or levels of care) and
information among multiple systems and sites of care, which
move progressively towards safe and
may range from data sharing to data integration and
appropriate sharing, interoperability and
developing large combined data sets. Efforts to create
integration with other sectors, such as social
cross-border exchange of data should be enhanced, such as
care. Inadequate legislation can embody a
the European Health Data Space (125). Population health
substantial barrier for population health
management can be successfully implemented without
management. Concerns related to
initially having all these data available. However, promoting
consent, confidentiality and
an environment of information liquidity is needed for engaging
cybersecurity should be
in advanced population health management. Accounting for
addressed.
information governance from the beginning can help avoid
important implementation hurdles.
33

=== PÁGINA 44 ===
4. Fit-for-purpose information systems: greater digital maturity embodies
a major leapfrogging opportunity to facilitate successful
population health management. Well-managed and
The core
-governed digitalization of health processes enables easier
starting-point is moving
data collection and storage, including patient-generated
from paper-based to electronic
data, more rapid and easier information exchange
health records, which are more
across dispersed databases and its integration;
collaborative and include data from a wider
identification and increased refinement of patient
set of PHC providers, enabling a
cohorts; more sophisticated segmentation and
multidisciplinary PHC approach. Then,
stratification processes; actionable visualization of
integrating patient-generated health information
the population health management results by
from personal health records, which can also be
PHC professionals; and better evaluation of
used by the patients and put them at the centre of
interventions. Digital solutions such as
their care. This enables moving from basic analytical
multiprofessional and intersectoral electronic
functionality in silos to linked data across the
health records, patient portals, mobile health
health system to linked data across health and
solutions for self-monitoring or for promoting
social care and beyond. Digitalization will
medication adherence and analytical software
require selecting and managing terms,
support different aspects of population health
standards and identifiers and
management.
harmonizing them to achieve
interoperable information
systems. 5. Data stewardship In countries
capacity and skills: the where public health is
ability to handle health- not fully developed as a
related big data, to master discipline and/or with no availability
sophisticated analytical tools of data analytic specialists, the
and to guide organizations to starting-point may be to invest in the
adapt their work practices in data stewardship and analysis skills of
the context of the digital public health specialists and of professionals
transformation is critical to working in the statistical offices and involving
advanced population health informaticians. Coordination and agreements
management. These can be to promote the synergistic work of national
enabled by new professionals, statistical offices, institutes of public
such as data analysts working health and health ministries, which are
closely with public health and often separate institutions with
PHC professionals, who act separate mandates, are
between the various organizations paramount.
at the regional and local levels to
ensure proper use of the data and focus
on data integration, storage, analysis and
visualization.
6. Financial incentives that support early detection and condition
management, task profile expansion and coordination and
In countries
integration across providers and levels of care. Payment
in which strategic
mechanisms aimed at enhancing PHC’s resolutive capacity and
purchasing is not yet a
excessively incentivizing hospital activity can support the
reality, the starting-point
adoption of population health management. Likewise,
may involve moving away
reforms shifting payment of providers from traditional fees
from line-item budgets
for services towards value-based payment models may
towards capitation-based
support population health management. Changing
payment in PHC and making
incentives by adapting the existing payment mechanisms to
legal changes to move
reward for continuity of care and proactive care, disease
towards greater
prevention and care coordination is key (126,127). Pooling funds
provider autonomy.
across a set of social and health-care services to redefine
investments that will optimize health can also enhance population
health management (128).
34

=== PÁGINA 45 ===
Organizational-level factors
In countries
7. Multidisciplinary and networked PHC with a low resolutive
models: although a population health PHC, the starting-point may
management approach can be be strengthening or establishing
deployed in health-care systems the family medicine specialty,
with distinct characteristics, small expanding the role and scope of
stand-alone PHC practices or PHC practice of PHC nurses and promoting
working alone cannot deliver teamwork and shared decision-
several elements of the more making. Once this is solidified, a
complex applications of population gradual approach can be adopted to
health management. Primary care add new members to the teams
networks that connect primary and such as social workers or
secondary care providers (or that mental health
enable PHC to move towards professionals.
multidisciplinary teams) and that synchronize
expertise in information governance and data
analysis facilitate population health management. Multidisciplinary PHC
teams can better provide coordinated care and meet a wide range of
patients’ needs, including addressing mental health problems and the
social determinants of health, paramount for population health
management (129). They can include community nurses,
In countries with
mental health professionals, physiotherapists, dietitians,
no tradition of
health and well-being coaches and social prescribers.
collaboration and coordination
between PHC and public health
8. Integration and close collaboration with public
services, a starting-point may involve
health and social care agencies: strong links with
delivering some public health services in PHC
public health services can enhance many of the
settings (such as vaccinations and screening);
elements required for PHC providers to adopt
planning together and delivering community health
population health management, such as:
activities (such as health promotion activities); and
adopting a population perspective in clinical
sharing population-level data (including on the social
practice; identifying and addressing community
determinants of health) and clinical information to
health problems with focus on the wider
fine-tune health needs assessment, population
determinants of health; and strengthening
segmentation and stratification processes, and
health promotion and disease prevention (130).
enhance clinical decision-making. A shared forum
Public health agencies can support PHC by
to enable professionals from across PHC and
providing training, sharing and exchanging
public health to develop collaborative
information for
approaches for population health
community action,
management can be a first step to A starting-point
providing evaluation
develop this to improve data collection
frameworks and
tradition. in PHC may be adopting WHO
research support etc.
International Classification of
Primary Care coding, which classifies
Clinical-level factors
patient data and clinical activity and
enables classification of the patient’s reason
9. Comprehensive and
for the encounter, the problems or diagnosis
systematic data collection in
managed, interventions carried out and the
PHC: the quality of the
ordering of these data by episodes of care. For
segmentation and
data on the social determinants of health, an
stratification processes
initial step may be establishing a core list of
depends on the richness (such
information to be collected and integrated
as including data on social
in PHC information systems and working
determinants of health) and
together with identified community
quality of the data collected, in
organizations to collect it.
many cases, by health-care
35

=== PÁGINA 46 ===
professionals themselves. Improving data recording, diagnostic coding or
updating registries improve the accuracy and reliability of the patients’
needs and risk scores.
10. Support from analysts, managers and local
In settings in
finance teams: since PHC professionals are
which these profiles
trained to deliver care instead of
are not easily available, a
analysing data, manage projects and
starting-point may be to work
implement programmes, moving
closer with public health
towards population health
professionals or statistical
management becomes easier if such
agencies, which may have better
profiles support PHC. This becomes a
data analysis skills. Investing in
symbiotic relationship between
building health management
primary care professionals, analysts,
capacity among PHC team
financial administrators and managers.
leaders is another good
Embedding these new profiles into PHC
strategy to
practices can be facilitated by the
start with.
networked approach described above. Each
contributes their skills and knowledge to ensure
that the insight from the data is translated into interventions that not
only lead to programmes of work to improve population health now but
sustain and develop them in an iterative manner, continually improving.
11. Guidelines to guide multidisciplinary and intersectoral workflows for the
various risk groups: since each professional group is socialized within its
own discipline, new ways of working need to be rooted and promoted by
developing multidisciplinary guidelines and care pathways. In moving
towards multidisciplinary teams, revising and updating the existing
clinical guidelines and protocols are essential to clearly reflect the new
roles and responsibilities of all team members.
12. Patient engagement: population health management
An initial step to
enhances the development of tailored treatment plans
improve patient engagement
and disease prevention activities agreed with
is to ensure that PHC providers are
patients. Population health management can
equipped to improve health literacy; to
support patient engagement and activation
provide e patient education on risk factors and
(activated citizens or patients have the
on self-management strategies; and to deliver
motivation, knowledge, skill and confidence to
effective behavioural interventions to support
take on the role of managing their health) as
patients in behavioural change as part of their routine
the refined knowledge about a population
clinical work. Regarding the latter, the WHO manual on
(and its individuals) and their social
integrated brief interventions for noncommunicable
determinants of health and enables
disease risk factors in primary care (134) is an effective tool
engagement strategies to be tailored. In
for primary care providers to help people quit tobacco,
addition, patients actively engaged in their
reduce or stop alcohol use and increase physical activity
own care are more likely to adhere to these
and can also help people achieve healthy eating
plans and to make shared decisions about
behaviour and manage weight for those living with
their own health, which yields better health
overweight and obesity. In addition, for people with
outcomes (131). People actively involved in their
chronic diseases, PHC teams planning
health tend to have better outcomes and, some
appointments in advance and following up
evidence suggests, incur lower health costs (132).
proactively via phone calls, text messages
Activated individuals are more likely to engage in
or other available tools is also
positive behaviour and have better health outcomes
relevant for patient
(133). Patient engagement is key, for instance, for ensuring
engagement.
that high-risk patients attend regular and follow-up
appointments, quit smoking or adhere to medication plans.
36

=== PÁGINA 47 ===
A critical initial
Community engagement: successful models of
step is establishing
population health engage partners across their
clear catchment areas to make
communities to address community culture,
PHC responsible for the health
perceptions of needs and the broader social
outcomes of a clearly defined
determinants of health (127). PHC providers are
population (not only individuals). Once
in a privileged position for driving this
this is done, PHC organizations can start
approach. Engaging communities in population
by mapping the community resources
health management can help move away from
(nongovernmental organizations, patient
biomedically focused solutions to public health
organizations, charities, cultural
ones that address the wider determinants of
resources etc.) active in their catchment
health. This can also help PHC providers in
area and establishing mechanisms to
fine-tuning population segmentation and risk
engage them in service delivery
stratification processes by providing local
and/or refer patients to
intelligence.
them.
13. An open mindset of health workers can overcome the
limitations of business as usual and embrace change by co-
creating new ways of working with each other and with patients and
reaching out to the community. Increasing the acknowledgement of the
potential benefits that adopting a population health management
approach can bring to clinical practice can facilitate PHC personnel to
engage in a new approach that will often include person-centred care
and shared decision-making, since these approaches naturally lend
themselves to addressing the underlying wider determinants driving the
health outcomes being addressed. The peer-to-peer networks outlined
above can help to foster this approach.
Time
Innovation culture
37
gnidnuF
PHM
leader
networks
Fig. 6. Success factors
for population health
management
System level Organization level Clinical level
1. Health and well-being 7. Multidisciplinary and 9. Comprehensive and
mindset networked PHC models systematic data collection
2. Support of policy and 8. Integration and close 10. Analysts, managers and
regulatory agencies collaboration with public local finance support
health and social care
3. Information governance 11. Guidelines to guide
agencies
arrangements multidisciplinary and
intersectoral workflows for
4. Fit-for-purpose
the various risk groups
information systems
12. Community
5. Data stewardship
engagement for health
capacity and skills
13. Patient engagement
6. Financial incentives
14. Open mindset for
embracing change and
co-creation

=== PÁGINA 48 ===
RECOMMENDED POLICY ACTIONS
Table 1 groups the recommended policy actions to help countries move
towards population health management following the PHC levers of the
WHO Operational Framework for Primary Health Care (21). This aims to
underscore three important considerations:
• Population health management is most effective within a holistic health
system strengthening approach with PHC at its core.
• Investing in PHC is paramount. It is the best place to engage in
population health management approaches and make progress towards
achieving the quintuple aim (17).
• To achieve maximum impact, synergistic action spanning over several or
all PHC levers is required. None of these recommendations will move
countries closer to population health management if implemented in
isolation.
The relationship between population health management and PHC is that of
a virtuous circle. Population health management helps to make PHC more
effective, and many elements of a strong PHC model are essential for
effective population health management. These elements have been
discussed as success factors in the previous section (multidisciplinary teams
underpinned by strong family medicine and advanced nursing roles, close
coordination and integration of primary care and public health services and
PHC networks). Thus, moving towards population health management
requires a determined effort for their implementation. Table 1, however,
focuses specifically on the recommendations more narrowly related to
population health management.
Table 1. Recommended policy actions for population health management
PHC Levers Recommended policy actions
Governance and policy 1. Establish a clear policy framework and
frameworks governance arrangements for population
health management at all levels, ensuring a
shared vision, properly defined roles and
responsibilities, a stepwise implementation
strategy and accountability mechanisms in
place.
2. Adjust current legislation and regulations to
enable population health management by
promoting interdisciplinary governance
structures, data sharing, interoperability and
integration.
Funding and 3. Use population health management to
allocation of resources contribute to the informed decision-making
process for efficient and equity-sensitive
funding and allocation of resources in PHC.
38

=== PÁGINA 49 ===
Table 1. (continued)
PHC Levers Recommended policy actions
Engagement of the 4. Establish a network of population health
community and other management champions to share experience,
stakeholders draw lessons learned and support
implementation. Ensure that champions
include frontline clinical and non-clinical PHC
workers and professional associations, health
managers and planners and implementers.
5. Encourage PHC providers to map the
community resources and stakeholders (local
government, nongovernmental organizations,
patient organizations, charities, cultural
resources etc.) active in their catchment area
and establish mechanisms to engage them in
the whole population health management
cycle and develop strategies for activating
patients.
Models of care 6. Incentivize PHC organizations to engage in
population health management by making
them formally responsible for the population
outcomes of a stable, clearly identified, and
registered population, usually as part of
defined catchment area.
7. Move progressively towards risk-stratified
models of care in which multidisciplinary PHC
teams provide coordinated care based on a
wider range of people’s needs and their
determinants.
PHC workforce 8. Create a learning environment for
population health management by updating
existing or developing new educational
programmes and postgraduate professional
training, including continual review and
improvement cycles.
Purchasing and 9. Adjust current payment systems to
payment systems stimulate population health management and
promote provider autonomy, early detection
and condition management, task profile
expansion, interdisciplinary work and
intersectoral activities (through, for example,
capitation, pay for performance, pay for
coordination or shared savings
arrangements).
39

=== PÁGINA 50 ===
Table 1. (continued)
PHC Levers Recommended policy actions
Digital and data 10. Enhance population health management
technologies for by ensuring the sharing of data within the
health health system (between services or levels of
care) and move progressively towards
sharing, interoperability and integration with
other sectors, such as social care.
11. Enhance population health management by
stimulating data quality, storage, integration
and stewardship in PHC and invest in tools
that allow PHC professionals to visualize
population segmentation and stratification
results in a clear and digestible manner.
12. Invest in the digitalization of PHC as part of
an overall system-wide, long term, health
information system strategy that sets a clear
vision and objectives on population health
management and is context specific.
Systems for improving 13. Use population segmentation and risk
data driven quality of stratification tools in PHC to improve the
care quality of care, enhance clinical decision-
making, tailor service delivery, reach out
proactively to patients and seek out
population cohorts experiencing health
inequalities.
14. Create professional awareness and
competencies among PHC professionals to
appreciate the use of data analysis and the
potential of predictive models to contribute
to improving service delivery and planning
and implementing targeted programmes for
all risk strata.
15. Promote the use of sociodemographic data
by PHC professionals throughout the
population health management cycle.
Monitoring and 16. Regularly plan, monitor and review the
evaluation performance of the population health
management inputs, processes and results to
enhance equity, efficiency, effectiveness and
impact.
40

=== PÁGINA 51 ===
REFERENCES
1. Jakab M, Farrington J, Borgermans L, Mantingh F. Health systems
respond to noncommunicable diseases: time for ambition.
Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office for Europe; 2018 (https://apps.
who.int/iris/handle/10665/342223, accessed 11 April 2023).
2. Multimorbidity: a priority for global health research. London:
Academy of Medical Sciences; 2018 (https://acmedsci.ac.uk/file-
download/82222577, accessed 11 April 2023).
3. Health for everyone? Social inequalities in health and health systems.
Paris: OECD Publishing; 2019 (https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/social-
issues-migration-health/health-for-everyone_3c8385d0-en, accessed
11 April 2023).
4. European Union. State of health in the EU companion report 2021.
Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union; 2022
(https://health.ec.europa.eu/state-health-eu/companion-report_en,
accessed 11 April 2023).
5. European Observatory on Health Systems and Policies, Rajan S,
Khunti K, Alwan N, Steves C, Greenhalgh T, MacDermott N et al. In the
wake of the pandemic: preparing for long COVID. Copenhagen: WHO
Regional Office for Europe; 2021 (https://apps.who.int/iris/
handle/10665/339629, accessed 11 April 2023).
6. European Observatory on Health Systems and Policies, van Ginneken
E, Reed S, Siciliani L, Eriksen A, Schlepper L, Tille F et al. Addressing
backlogs and managing waiting lists during and beyond the COVID-19
pandemic. Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office for Europe; 2022
(https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/358832, accessed 11 April
2023).
7. Transforming the health and social equity landscape: promoting
socially just and inclusive growth to improve resilience, solidarity and
peace: executive summary. Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office for
Europe; 2023 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/366213,
accessed 11 April 2023).
8. Mackenbach JP, Kulhánová I, Artnik B, Bopp M, Borrell C, Clemens T et
al. Changes in mortality inequalities over two decades: register based
study of European countries. BMJ. 2016;353:i1732.
9. Berwick DM, Nolan TW, Whittington J. The triple aim: care, health, and
cost. Health Aff (Millwood). 2018;27:759–69.
10. Health in the well-being economy. Background paper: working
together to achieve healthy, fairer, prosperous societies across the
WHO European Region. Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office for Europe;
2023 (https://www.who.int/europe/publications/i/item/WHO-
EURO-2023-7144-46910-68439, accessed 11 April 2023).
11. Regional digital health action plan for the WHO European Region
2023–2030. Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office for Europe; 2022
(https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/360950, accessed 11 April
2023).
12. Dolley S. Big data’s role in precision public health. Front Public Health.
2018;6:68.
41

=== PÁGINA 52 ===
13. Cozzoli N, Salvatore FP, Faccilongo N, Milone M. How can big data
analytics be used for healthcare organization management? Literary
framework and future research from a systematic review. BMC Health
Serv Res. 2022;22:809.
14. Wells TS, Ozminkowski RJ, Hawkins K, Bhattarai GR, Armstrong DG.
Leveraging big data in population health management. Big Data
Analytics. 2016;1:1.
15. Silberberg M, Martinez-Bianchi V, Lyn M. What is population health?
Prim Care. 2019;46:475–84.
16. McGinnis JM, Williams-Russo P, Knickman JR. The case for more active
policy attention to health promotion. Health Aff (Millwood).
2002;21:78–93.
17. Nundy S, Cooper LA, Mate KS. The quintuple aim for health care
improvement: a new imperative to advance health equity. JAMA.
2022;327:521–2.
18. Population health management flatpack. A guide to starting
population health management. London: NHS England; 2018 (https://
imperialcollegehealthpartners.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/
Population-Health-Management-Flatpack-Version-1.0-Final-Sent.pdf,
accessed 11 April 2023).
19. Starfield B, Leiyu S, Macinko J. Contribution of primary care to health
systems and health. Milbank Q. 2005;83:457–502.
20. Bodenheimer T, Ghorob A, Willard-Grace R, Grumbach K. The 10
building blocks of high-performing primary care. Ann Fam Med.
2014;12:166–71.
21. WHO, UNICEF . Operational framework for primary health care:
transforming vision into action. Geneva: World Health Organization;
2020 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/337641, accessed 11
April 2023).
22. 21st century health challenges: can the essential public health
functions make a difference? Geneva: World Health Organization; 2021
(https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/351510, accessed 11 April
2023).
23. European Programme of Work, 2020–2025: United Action for Better
Health. Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office for Europe; 2021 (https://
apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/339209, accessed 11 April 2023).
24. Marmot M, Allen J, Goldblatt P, Boyce T, McNeish D, Grady M et al.
(2010). Fair society, healthy lives: strategic review of health
inequalities in England post 2010. London: Strategic Review of Health
Inequalities in England post-2010 (http://www.instituteofhealthequity.
org/resources-reports/fair-society-healthy-lives-the-marmot-review,
accessed 11 April 2023).
25. Primary care networks. London: NHS England; 2023 (https://www.
england.nhs.uk/primary-care/primary-care-networks, accessed 11 April
2023).
26. Type 2 diabetes in adults: management. London: NICE; 2022 (http://
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/NG28, accessed 11 April 2023).
27. Lewis GH. Impactibility models: identifying the subgroup of high-risk
patients most amenable to hospital-avoidance programs. Milbank Q.
2010;88:240–55.
42

=== PÁGINA 53 ===
28. Hacker K, Walker DK. Achieving population health in accountable care
organizations. Am J Public Health. 2013;103:1163–7.
29. Bernstein RH. New arrows in the quiver for targeting care
management: high-risk versus high-opportunity case identification. J
Ambul Care Manage. 2007;30:39–51.
30. Marchildon GP, Brammli-Greenberg S, Dayan M, De Belvis AG, Gandré
C, Isaksson D. Achieving higher performing primary care through
patient registration: a review of twelve high-income countries. Health
Policy, 2021;125:1507–16.
31. Yan S, Kwan YH, Tan CS, Thumboo J, Low LL. A systematic review of
the clinical application of data-driven population segmentation
analysis. BMC Med Res Methodol. 2018;18:121.
32. Civil registration and vital statistics (CRVS) [website]. Copenhagen:
WHO Regional Office for Europe; 2023 (https://www.who.int/data/
data-collection-tools/civil-registration-and-vital-statistics-(crvs),
accessed 11 April 2023).
33. De Joong JD. Explaining medical practice variation. Social organization
and institutional mechanisms. Utrecht: Nivel; 2008 (https://www.nivel.
nl/sites/default/files/bestanden/Proefschrift-explaining-medical-
practice-variation-2008.pdf, accessed 11 April 2023
34. Lafortune L, Béland F, Bergman H, Ankri J Health status transitions in
community-living elderly with complex care needs: a latent class
approach. BMC Geriatr. 2009;9:6.
35. Churruca K, Pomare C, Ellis LA, Long JC, Henderson SB, Murphy LED et
al. Patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs): a review of generic
and condition-specific measures and a discussion of trends and issues.
Health Expect. 2021;24:1015–24.
36. Black N. Patient reported outcome measures could help transform
healthcare. BMJ. 2013;346:f167.
37. Vuik SI, Mayer EK, Darzi A. Patient segmentation analysis offers
significant benefits for integrated care and support. Health Aff
(Millwood). 2016;35:769–75.
38. Huntley AL, Johnson R, Purdy S, Valderas JM, Salisbury C. Measures of
multimorbidity and morbidity burden for use in primary care and
community settings: a systematic review and guide. Ann Fam Med.
2012;10:134–41.
39. Chong JL, Lim KK, Matchar DB. Population segmentation based on
healthcare needs: a systematic review. Syst Rev. 2019;8:202.
40. Low LL, Yan S, Kwan YH, Tan CS, Thumboo J. Assessing the validity of a
data driven segmentation approach: a 4 year longitudinal study of
healthcare utilization and mortality. PLoS One. 2018;13:e0195243.
41. Zhou YY, Wong W, Li H. Improving care for older adults: a model to
segment the senior population. Perm J. 2014;18:18–21.
42. Monterde D, Vela E, Clèries M, Garcia-Eroles L, Roca J, Pérez-Sust P.
Multimorbidity as a predictor of health service utilization in primary
care: a registry-based study of the Catalan population. BMC Fam
Pract. 2020;21:39.
43

=== PÁGINA 54 ===
43. Primary care home: population health management. London: National
Association of Primary Care; 2019 (https://napc.co.uk/primary-care-
home/, accessed 11 April 2023).
44. Prevention and control of noncommunicable diseases in Belarus: the
case for investment. Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office for Europe;
2018 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/343979, accessed 11
April 2023).
45. Pogosova N, Sokolova O. Governmental efforts for cardiovascular
disease prevention efforts in the Russian Federation. Cardiovasc Diagn
Ther. 2017;7:S48–54.
46. Farrington J, Koylyu A, Staehr Johansen A, Corbex M, Rakovac I, Yordi
Aguirre I . Better noncommunicable disease outcomes: challenges and
opportunities for health systems: Turkmenistan country assessment.
Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office for Europe; 2019 (https://apps.
who.int/iris/handle/10665/346304, accessed 11 April 2023).
47. Akkazieva B, Tello J, Smith B, Jakab M, Krasovsky, K, Sautenkova N et
al. Better non-communicable disease outcomes: challenges and
opportunities for health systems. Tajikistan country assessment.
Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office for Europe; 2015 (https://apps.who.
int/iris/handle/10665/153907, accessed 11 April 2023).
48. Hospital beds per 10 000. Vilnius: Lithuanian Hygiene Institute; 2023
(https://sveikstat.hi.lt/chart-trends-timeline.aspx?top_uid=109&top_
loc=mun&sel_rep_panel=4&lang=eng&hide_filters=&, accessed 11
April 2023).
49. Avoidable mortality. Vilnius: Lithuanian Hygiene Institute; 2023
(https://sveikstat.hi.lt/chart-trends-timeline.aspx?top_uid=92&top_
loc=mun&sel_rep_panel=4&lang=lit&hide_filters=0 ).
50. Eissens van der Laan MR, van Offenbeek MA, Broekhuis H, Slaets JP. A
person-centred segmentation study in elderly care: towards efficient
demand-driven care. Soc Sci Med. 2014;113:68–76.
51. Integrated care models: an overview. Copenhagen: WHO Regional
Office for Europe; 2016 (https://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/
pdf_file/0005/322475/Integrated-care-models-overview.pdf,
accessed 11 April 2023).
52. Wagner J, Hall JD, Ross RL, Cameron D, Sachdeva B, Kansagara D et al.
Implementing risk stratification in primary care: challenges and
strategies. J Am Board Fam Med. 2019;32:585–95.
53. Girwar SM, Jabroer R, Fiocco M, Sutch SP, Numans ME, Bruijnzeels MA.
A systematic review of risk stratification tools internationally used in
primary care settings. Health Sci Rep. 2021;4:e329.
54. Acheson RM. The definition and identification of need for health care. J
Epidemiol Community Health. 1978;32:10–5.
55. SCORE2 working group and ESC Cardiovascular risk collaboration.
SCORE2 risk prediction algorithms: new models to estimate 10-year
risk of cardiovascular disease in Europe. Eur Heart J. 2021;42:2439–54.
56. WHO package of essential noncommunicable (PEN) disease
interventions for primary health care. Geneva: World Health
Organization; 2020 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/334186,
accessed 11 April 2023).
57. HEARTS technical package for cardiovascular disease management in
primary health care: risk-based cardiovascular disease management.
Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020 (https://apps.who.int/iris/
handle/10665/333221, accessed 11 April 2023).
44

=== PÁGINA 55 ===
58. Lindstrom J, Tuomilehto J. The diabetes risk score: a practical tool to
predict type 2 diabetes risk. Diabetes Care. 2003;26:725–31.
59. Charlson M, Wells MT, Ullman R, King F, Shmukler C. The Charlson
comorbidity index can be used prospectively to identify patients who
will incur high future costs. PLoS One. 2014;9:e112479.
60. Garcia Gonzalez JV, Diaz E, Salamea A, Cabrera D, Menendez A,
Fernandez Sanchez A et al. Evaluacion de la fiabilidad y validez de una
escala de valoración social en el anciano [An evaluation of the
feasibility and validity of a scale of social assessment of older people].
Aten Primaria. 1999;23:434–40.
61. Activation of stratification strategies and results of the interventions
on frail patients of healthcare services. Appraisal standard dashboard.
ASSEHS project; 2018 (https://appraisalstandard.kronikgune.org,
accessed 11 April 2023).
62. The Johns Hopkins ACG® System: excerpt from version 11.0 technical
reference guide. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University; 2014 (https://
www.hopkinsacg.org/documents/system-documentation, accessed 11
April 2023).
63. Orueta J-F, Urraca J, Berraondo I, Darpon J, Aurrekoetxea J-J. Adjusted
clinical groups (ACGs) explain the utilization of primary care in Spain
based on information registered in the medical records: a cross-
sectional study. Health Policy. 2006;76:38–48.
64. Carlsson L, Borjesson U, Edgren L. Patient based “burden-of-illness” in
Swedish primary health care. Applying the Johns Hopkins ACG case-
mix system in a retrospective study of electronic patient records. Int J
Health Plann Manage. 2002;17:269–79.
65. 3MTM clinical risk groups: measuring risk, managing care. Salt Lake
City: 3M Health Information Systems; 2016 (https://multimedia.3m.
com/mws/media/765833O/3m-crgs-measuring-risk-managing-care-
white-paper.pdf, accessed 11 April 2023).
66. Hughes JS, Averill RF, Eisenhandler J, Goldfield NI, Muldoon J, Neff JM
et al. Clinical risk groups (CRGs): a classification system for risk-
adjusted capitation-based payment and health care management.
Med Care. 2004;42:81–90.
67. Huntley AL, Johnson R, Purdy S, Valderas JM, Salisbury C. Measures of
multimorbidity and morbidity burden for use in primary care and
community settings: a systematic review and guide. Ann Fam Med.
2012;10:134–41.
68. Dueñas-Espín I, Vela E, Pauws S, Bescos C, Cano I, Cleries M et al.
Proposals for enhanced health risk assessment and stratification in an
integrated care scenario. BMJ Open. 2016;6:e010301.
69. D’Avolio LW. Beyond racial bias: rethinking risk stratification in health
care. Health Affairs. January 15, 2020 (https://www.healthaffairs.org/
do/10.1377/forefront.20200109.382726/full, accessed 11 April 2023).
70. Obermeyer Z, Powers B, Vogeli C, Mullainathan S. Dissecting racial bias
in an algorithm used to manage the health of populations. Science.
2019;366:447–53.
71. Nalin M, Bedbrook A, Baroni I, Romano M, Borrás TA, Avolio F et al.
White paper on deployment of stratification methods. ASSEHS
Project; 2016 (https://www.researchgate.net/publication/309242777_
White_Paper_On_Deployment_of_Stratification_Methods, accessed
11 April 2023).
72. Freund T, Mahler C, Erler A, Gensichen J, Ose D, Szecsenyi J et al.
Identification of patients likely to benefit from care management
programs. Am J Manag Care. 2011;17:345–52.
45

=== PÁGINA 56 ===
73. AHRQ quality indicators – guide to prevention quality indicators:
hospital admission for ambulatory care sensitive conditions. Rockville
(MD): Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2001.
74. Freund T, Mahler C, Erler A, Gensichen J, Ose D, Szecsenyi J et al.
Identification of patients likely to benefit from care management
programs. Am J Manag Care. 2011;17:345–52.
75. Monterde D, Vela E, Clèries M; grupo colaborativo GMA. Los grupos de
morbilidad ajustados: nuevo agrupador de morbilidad poblacional de
utilidad en el ámbito de la atención primaria [Adjusted morbidity
groups: a new multiple morbidity measurement for use in primary
care]. Aten Primaria. 2016;48:674–82.
76. Cerezo Cerezo J, Arias López C. Population stratification: a
fundamental instrument used for population health management in
Spain: good practice brief. Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office for
Europe; 2018 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/345586,
accessed 11 April 2023).
77. Catalan model of care for people with frailty, complex chronic (CCP)
and advanced chronic (ACP) conditions. Barcelona: Directorate-
General for Health Planning of the Ministry of Health; 2021 (https://
salutweb.gencat.cat/web/.content/_ambits-actuacio/Linies-
dactuacio/Estrategies-de-salut/Cronicitat/Documentacio-cronicitat/
arxius/catalan-model-care-en.pdf, accessed 11 April 2023).
78. Dueñas-Espín I, Vela E, Pauws S, Bescos C, Cano I, Cleries M et al.
Proposals for enhanced health risk assessment and stratification in an
integrated care scenario. BMJ Open. 2016;6:e010301.
79. Thirty-year retrospective of Catalan health planning: driver of health
system transformation. Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office for Europe;
2020 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/357862, accessed 11
April 2023).
80. Kenward C, Pratt A, Creavin S, Wood R, Cooper J. Population health
management to identify and characterise ongoing health need for
high-risk individuals shielded from COVID-19: a cross-sectional cohort
study. BMJ Open. 2020;10:e041370.
81. Population health management: a system-wide dataset for Bristol,
North Somerset, and South Gloucestershire [website]. Healthier
Together; 2020. (https://bnssghealthiertogether.org.uk/population-
health-management, accessed 11 April 2023).
82. Walker DK. Time to embrace public health approaches to national and
global challenges. Am J Public Health. 2008;98:1934–6.
83. Frieden TR. A framework for public health action: the health impact
pyramid. Am J Public Health 2010;100:590–5.
84. Recomendaciones para el diseño de estrategias de salud comunitaria
en atención primaria a nivel autonómico [Recommendations for the
design of community health strategies in primary care at the regional
level]. Madrid: Ministry of Health, Consumer Affairs and Social Welfare;
2022 (https://www.sanidad.gob.es/profesionales/saludPublica/
prevPromocion/Estrategia/docs/recomendaciones_estrategia_salud_
comunitaria.pdf, accessed 11 April 2023).
85. Carroll D, Kemner A, Schootman M. Operationalizing population health
management in practice. Mo Med. 2018;115:533–6.
46

=== PÁGINA 57 ===
86. A toolkit on how to implement social prescribing. Manila: WHO
Regional Office for the Western Pacific; 2022 (https://apps.who.int/
iris/handle/10665/354456, accessed 11 April 2023).
87. Drinkwater C, Wildman J, Moffatt S. Social prescribing. BMJ.
2019;364:l1285.
88. Benedé-Azagra C, Gallego-Diéguez J, Lou-Alcaine M, Marzo-Arana J.
Estrategia de atención comunitaria en el sistema de salud de Aragón.
Atención primaria. Gobierno de Aragón [Community care strategy in
the health system of Aragon. Primary care. Government of Aragon].
Huesca: Department of Health; 2019.
89. Social prescribing: reference guide and technical annex for primary
care networks. London: NHS England; 2023 (https://www.england.nhs.
uk/long-read/social-prescribing-reference-guide-and-technical-
annex-for-primary-care-networks, accessed 11 April 2023).
90. Heijnders ML, Meijs JJ. “Welzijn op Recept” (social prescribing): a
helping hand in re-establishing social contacts – an explorative
qualitative study. Prim Health Care Res Dev. 2018;19:223–31.
91. Hoffmeister LV, Nunes MF, Figueiredo CEM, Coelho A, Oliveira MFF,
Massano P et al. Evaluation of the impact and implementation of
social prescribing in primary healthcare units in Lisbon: a mixed-
methods study protocol. Int J Integr Care. 2021;21:26.
92. Golubinski V, Wild EM, Winter V, Schreyögg J. Once is rarely enough:
can social prescribing facilitate adherence to non-clinical community
and voluntary sector health services? Empirical evidence from
Germany. BMC Public Health. 2020;20:1827.
93. García-Blanco D, Cubillo-Llanes J. Orientación comunitaria en los
equipos de atención primaria [Community orientation in primary care
teams]. Atención Primaria Práctica. 2023;5:100165.
94. Moffatt S, Steer M, Lawson S, Penn L, O’Brien N. Link worker social
prescribing to improve health and well-being for people with long-
term conditions: qualitative study of service user perceptions. BMJ
Open. 2017;7:e015203.
95. Jensen A. Culture vitamins – an arts on prescription project in
Denmark. Perspect Public Health. 2019;139:131–6.
96. Johansson E, Jonsson F, Rapo E, Lundgren AS, Hörnsten Å, Nilsson I.
Let’s try social prescribing in Sweden (SPiS) – an interventional project
targeting loneliness among older adults using a model for integrated
care: a research protocol. Int J Integr Care. 2021;21:33.
97. Hildebrandt H, Knittel R, Richter-Reichhelm M, Siegel A, Witzenrath W.
Gesundes Kinzigtal integrated care: improving population health by a
shared health gain approach and a shared savings contract. Int J
Integr Care. 2010;10:e046.
98. Esseling P. The business of population health management. London:
Advisory Board; 2017 (https://www.advisory.com/topics/population-
health-roi/2017/12/gesundes-kinzigtal-care-model, accessed 11 April
2023).
99. European Observatory on Health Systems and Policies, Groene O,
Hildebrandt H, Ferrer L, Stein KV. People-centred population health
management in Germany. Eurohealth. 2016;22( 2) :7–10. Copenhagen:
47

=== PÁGINA 58 ===
WHO Regional Office for Europe; 2016 (https://apps.who.int/iris/
handle/10665/332699, accessed 11 April 2023).
100. Integrated, person-centred primary health care produces results: case
study from Slovenia. Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office for Europe;
2020 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/336184, accessed 11
April 2023).
101. The family medicine specialist nurse’s role in primary health care
management of patients with noncommunicable diseases in Slovenia.
Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office for Europe; 2020 (https://apps.
who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/336184/9789289055284-eng.
pdf, accessed 11 April 2023).
102. Workshops and consultations [website]. Ljubljana: National Institute
of Public Health; 2023 (https://www.skupajzazdravje.si/en/activities-
to-improve-your-health/workshops-and-consultations, accessed 11
April 2023).
103. Petrič VK, Pribaković Brinovec R, Maučec Zakotnik J. Health promotion
centres in Slovenia: integrating population and individual services to
reduce health inequalities at community level: good practice brief.
Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office for Europe; 2018 (https://apps.
who.int/iris/handle/10665/345843, accessed 11 April 2023).
104. Klemenc-Ketis Z, Benkovič R, Poplas-Susič A. A Slovenian model of
comprehensive care for patients with difficulties accessing healthcare:
a step towards health equity. J Community Health Nurs. 2019;36:139–
46.
105. NIJZ podatkovni portal [National Institute of Public Health data
portal] [online database]. Ljubljana: National Institute of Public
Health; 2022 (https://podatki.nijz.si/pxweb/sl/NIJZ%20
podatkovni%20portal, accessed 11 April 2023).
106. Report of the National Center for Pediatrics and Pediatric Surgery,
Kazakhstan. Almaty: National Center for Pediatrics and Pediatric
Surgery; 2021.
107. Núñez Sabarís A, Satorras M, Nurmagambetova B, Shevshenko E. The
evaluation of primary health care (PHC) impact on infant and child
mortality reduction 2000–2017 in Kazakhstan. Volume 1: Assessment
of the universal progressive home visiting model. Almaty: UNICEF
Country Office in Kazakhstan; 2019.
108. Abdusametov Z. Presentation on implementation of universal-
progressive model of patronage and its impact on reducing the risks
of child development in Kyzylorda region. Astana, 2019.
109. Nwaru BI, Friedman C, Halamka J, Sheikh A. Can learning health
systems help organisations deliver personalised care? BMC Med.
2017;15:177.
110. Jha AK. Population health management: saving lives and saving
money? JAMA. 2019;322:390–1.
111. David G, Smith-McLallen A, Ukert B. The effect of predictive analytics-
driven interventions on healthcare utilization. J Health Econ.
2019;64:68–79.
112. Murphy SME, Hough DE, Sylvia ML, Sherry M, Dunbar LJ, Zollinger R, et
al. Going beyond clinical care to reduce health care spending: findings
from the J-CHiP community-based population health management
48

=== PÁGINA 59 ===
program evaluation. Med Care. 2018;56:603–9.
113. Grossmeier J, Seaverson EL, Mangen DJ, Wright S, Dalal K, Phalen C et
al. Impact of a comprehensive population health management
program on health care costs. J Occup Environ Med. 2013;55:634–43.
114. Andermann A, Pang T, Newton JN, Davis A, Panisset U. Evidence for
health. I. Producing evidence for improving health and reducing
inequities. Health Res Policy Syst. 2016;14:18.
115. Gervasi SS, Chen IY, Smith-McLallen A, Sontag D, Obermeyer Z,
Vennera M et al. The potential for bias in machine learning and
opportunities for health insurers to address it. Health Aff (Millwood).
2022;41:212–8.
116. Shadmi E, Freund T. Targeting patients for multimorbid care
management interventions: the case for equity in high-risk patient
identification. Int J Equity Health. 2013;12:70.
117. Orueta J, Nuño-Solinis R, Mateos M, Vergara I, Grandes G, Esnaola S.
Predictive risk modelling in the Spanish population: a cross-sectional
study. BMC Health Serv Res. 2013;13:269.
118. Soto-Gordoa M, de Manuel E, Fullaondo A, Merino M, Arrospide A,
Igartua JA et al. Impact of stratification on the effectiveness of a
comprehensive patient-centered strategy for multimorbid patients.
Health Serv Res. 2019;54:466–73.
119. Mateo-Abad M, González N, Fullaondo A, Merino M, Azkargorta L, Giné
A et al. Impact of the CareWell integrated care model for older
patients with multimorbidity: a quasi-experimental controlled study in
the Basque Country. BMC Health Serv Res. 2020;20:613.
120. Population health program description. Seattle: Kaiser Permanente
Washington; 2020 (https://wa.kaiserpermanente.org/static/pdf/
public/about/population-health-2020.pdf, accessed 11 April 2023).
121. Alderwick H, Ham C, Buck D. Population health systems: going beyond
integrated care. London: King’s Fund; 2015.
122. Ayanian JZ, Landon BE, Newhouse JP, Zaslavsky AM. Racial and ethnic
disparities among enrollees in Medicare Advantage plans. N Engl J
Med. 2014;371:2288–97.
123. Doubeni CA, Corley DA, Zhao W, Lau Y, Jensen CD, Levin TR.
Association between improved colorectal screening and racial
disparities. N Engl J Med. 2022;386:796–8.
124. Chana N. Five ways to improve patient care and staff morale. Blog 2,
February 2017. London: NHS England; 2017 (http://www.england.nhs.
uk/blog/nav-chana, accessed 11 April 2023).
125. European Health Data Space. Brussels: European Commission; 2023
(https://health.ec.europa.eu/ehealth-digital-health-and-care/
european-health-data-space_en, accessed 11 April 2023).
126. Shock LP. Models of population health. Prim Care. 2019;46:595–602.
127. de Vries EF, Drewes HW, Struijs JN, Heijink R, Baan CA. Barriers to
payment reform: experiences from nine Dutch population health
management sites. Health Policy. 2019;123:1100–7.
128. The Greater Manchester Population Health Plan 2017–2021.
Manchester: Greater Manchester Authority; 2017 (https://www.gmhsc.
org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/Population-Health-
49

=== PÁGINA 60 ===
Plan-2017-2021.pdf, accessed 11 April 2023).
129. Busse R, Stahl J. Integrated care experiences and outcomes in
Germany, the Netherlands, and England. Health Aff (Millwood).
2014;33:1549–58.
130. European Observatory on Health Systems and Policies, Rechel B. How
to enhance the integration of primary care and public health?
Approaches, facilitating factors and policy options. Copenhagen: WHO
Regional Office for Europe; 2020 (https://apps.who.int/iris/
handle/10665/330491, accessed 11 April 2023).
131. Graffigna G, Barello S, Bonamoni A. The role of Patient Health
Engagement model (PHE-model) in affecting patient activation and
medication adherence: a structural equation model. PLoS One.
2017;12:e0179865.
132. James J. Health policy brief: patient engagement. Health Affairs.
February 14, 2013 (https://www.healthaffairs.org/do/10.1377/
hpb20130214.898775/full/healthpolicybrief_86-1567175617979.pdf,
accessed 11 April 2023).
133. Hibbard JH. What patient engagement means and why it works.
Rockville (MD): Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2015
(https://effectivehealthcare.ahrq.gov/products/eccs-2015/white-
paper-2015-1, accessed 11 April 2023).
134. Integrated brief interventions for noncommunicable disease risk
factors in primary care: the manual: BRIEF project. Copenhagen: WHO
Regional Office for Europe; 2022 (https://apps.who.int/iris/
handle/10665/364437, accessed 11 April 2023).

=== PÁGINA 61 ===
The WHO Regional Office for Europe
The World Health Organization (WHO) is a specialized agency of the United Nations
created in 1948 with the primary responsibility for international health matters and
public health. The WHO Regional Office for Europe is one of six regional offices
throughout the world, each with its own programme geared to the particular health
conditions of the countries it serves.
Member States
Albania Lithuania
Andorra Luxembourg
Armenia Malta
Austria Monaco
Azerbaijan Montenegro
Belarus Netherlands (Kingdom of the)
Belgium North Macedonia
Bosnia and Herzegovina Norway
Bulgaria Poland
Croatia Portugal
Cyprus Republic of Moldova
Czechia Romania
Denmark Russian Federation
Estonia San Marino
Finland Serbia
France Slovakia
Georgia Slovenia
Germany Spain
Greece Sweden
Hungary Switzerland
Iceland Tajikistan
Ireland Türkiye
Israel Turkmenistan
Italy Ukraine
Kazakhstan United Kingdom
Kyrgyzstan Uzbekistan
Latvia
WHO/EURO:2023-7497-47264-69316
WHO European Centre for Primary Health Care
UN Plaza
303 Baizakova Street
Almaty A15G7T0
Kazakhstan
Email: eurocphc@who.int
Website: https://www.who.int/europe/teams/
centre-for-primary-health-care-(kaz)
